OVERVIEW: The AS-2 KIPPER (Kh-10SD) is an air-launched, long-range, supersonic, solid-fuel, turbojet-powered, anti-ship (ASM) missile.  It has a 200 kT nuclear warhead.

DETAILS:  the Kipper cruised on its approach to a target at an altitude of about 10,000 meters using inertial navigation.  , until it reaches the range of about 100 to 110 kilometers from the target, where it enters a shallow 15 degree dive. When it reaches a range of 60 to 70 kilometers it levels out at an altitude of between 800 and 1,000 meters where it cruises until it reaches a range of 10 to 16 kilometers, when the missiles active guidance is engaged. It then enters a dive, striking the target vessel close to or below the waterline

NOTES: The AS-2 became operational in 1961. It was carried by the Tu-16 BADGER C. 

SOURCES: Jane's Weapons Systems, Vol. 4: Strategic, "Kh-10S (AS-2 'Kipper')" 13 Oct 2011; GlobalSecurity.org - Reliable Security Information. "K-10S (AS-2 Kipper)." Accessed November 11, 2013. http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/world/russia/as-2.htm ; Norman Polmar, "Guide to the Soviet Navy, 3rd ed. (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1983), 357.


K-10S (AS-2 Kipper)

The AS-2 air-to-surface missile is a supersonic, turbojet-powered, low-level run-in, cruise missile with a range of 30 to 100 nm. The K-10S missile (Article 352), developed especially for the Tu-16K-10 (Badger-C) as an anti-ship weapon, was in October 1961, together with that aircraft certified for ordnance. One K-10S missile is suspended from the aircraft, under the middle section of the fuselage. It carries either a conventional or a nuclear 2200-lb warhead. The missile weighs approximately 9120 pounds. For guidance, it uses a preprogrammed autopilot for launch and climb, an autopilot with command correction for mid-course flight, and active radar for terminal flight. The guidance system combines inertial guidance during the initial flight stage and active-radar homing close to the target. The missile can carry a nuclear warhead. It has a CEP of 150 ft when used in an anti-ship role and a CEP of 1 to 2 nm when used against land targets. 

K-10 - Air-Launched Cruise Missile of class "air-surface". It is accepted to the armament in 1961. It has the turbojet engine, which is established in the lower part of the fuselage, the system of beam-rider guidance + OF ARLGSN in the last stage of flight. Glider - all-metal monoplane with those be cantilevereding (arrow-shaped form) by wing and tail assembly. Wings are added with the storage and the transport. Fairing about the honeycomb construction. Basic materials, used with the production of the glider: D -16T, AMG-', ML -5, AL -8, Y2KH2NVFA. Cast in block knots: stabilizer, keel, power frames (magnesium loam casting). 

With the production of rocket K-10 the production of the fairings about the honeycomb construction was new technological process. Their molding was produced into several stages. Internal and outer casings were formed with at first vacuum method on the steel punches. In parallel on the special equipment honeycomb fillers from the fiberglass fabric were made. To the internal jacket (also on the punch) of priformovyvalsya honeycomb filler, then dressed the formed outer casing and belt; all this was placed into the furnace, where on the three-stage temperature conditions was conducted polymerization. But not all was smoothly, went the marriage: bubbles, stratification and other defects. The search for the solution of these problems began. Active part in it took such key personnel, as A. i. Pushkin, A. i. babanin, A. S. Zazakov, N. V. kashcheyev, In. V. Pavlov (VIAM - ALL-UNION SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF AVIATION MATERIALS), M.Z.Eydlin and V. i. lagutin (BAR). Process was fixed, and the production of articles was provide ford. 
