Journal of Machine Learning Research 24 (2023) 1-56 Submitted 11/21; Revised 10/22; Published 2/23
Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Joshua Cutler jocutler@uw.edu
Department of Mathematics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195-4322, USA
Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy ddrusv@uw.edu
Department of Mathematics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195-4322, USA
Zaid Harchaoui zaid@uw.edu
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195-4322, USA
Editor: Alekh Agarwal
Abstract
We consider the problem of minimizing a convex function that is evolving according to
unknown and possibly stochastic dynamics, which may depend jointly on time and on the
decision variable itself. Such problems abound in the machine learning and signal processing
literature, under the names of concept drift, stochastic tracking, and performative prediction.
We provide novel non-asymptotic convergence guarantees for stochastic algorithms with
iterate averaging, focusing on bounds valid both in expectation and with high probability.
The efficiency estimates we obtain clearly decouple the contributions of optimization error,
gradient noise, and time drift. Notably, we identify a low drift-to-noise regime in which the
tracking efficiency of the proximal stochastic gradient method benefits significantly from a
step decay schedule. Numerical experiments illustrate our results.
Keywords: stochastic gradient, stochastic tracking, concept drift, performative prediction,
high-probability bounds
1. Introduction
Stochastic optimization underpins much of machine learning theory and practice. Significant
progress has been made over the last two decades in the finite-time analysis of stochastic
approximation algorithms (Bottou, 2003; Bottou and Bousquet, 2007; Bottou, 2012; Srebro
et al., 2011; Agarwal et al., 2014; Lang et al., 2019; Bach and Moulines, 2011; Sra et al.,
2011; Nemirovski et al., 2009). The predominant assumption in much of the work on
stochastic optimization for machine learning is that the distribution generating the data is
fixed throughout the run of the process. There is no shortage of problems, however, where
this assumption is grossly violated. There are two main sources of such distributional shifts.
The first is temporal, wherein the distribution varies slowly in time due to reasons that
are independent of the learning process. This setting is often called dynamic stochastic
approximation (Dupaˇc, 1965) and is the basis for adaptive algorithms for stochastic track-
©c 2023 Joshua Cutler, Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy, Zaid Harchaoui.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attribution requirements are provided
at http://jmlr.org/papers/v24/21-1410.html.Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
ing (Benveniste et al., 1990). The second common source is due to a feedback mechanism,
wherein the distribution generating the data may depend on, or react to, the decisions
made by the learner. This setting has been a subject of increased interest recently in the
context of strategic classification and performative prediction (Mendler-D¨unner et al., 2020;
Drusvyatskiy and Xiao, 2022).
In this work, we present finite-time efficiency estimates in expectation and with high
probability for the tracking error of the proximal stochastic gradient method under time
drift. The results are presented in a single framework that encompasses both the purely
temporal and the decision-dependent time drift. Our results concisely explain the interplay
between the learning rate, the noise variance in the gradient oracle, and the strength of the
time drift. While conventional wisdom and previous work recommend the use of a constant
step size under time drift, we identify a low drift-to-noise regime in which tracking efficiency
benefits significantly from a step size schedule that geometrically decays to a \critical step
size".
Setting the stage, consider the sequence of stochastic optimization problems
min
x
’t(x) := ft(x) + rt(x) (1)
indexed by time t 2 N. In typical machine learning and signal processing settings, the
function ft corresponds to an average loss that varies in time, while the regularizer rt models
constraints or promotes structure (e.g., sparsity) in the variable x. Two examples are
worth highlighting. The first is a classical problem in signal processing related to stochastic
tracking (Kushner and Yin, 1997; Sayed, 2003), wherein the learning algorithm aims to track
over time a moving target driven by an unknown stochastic process. The second example is
the concept drift phenomenon in online learning (Hazan and Seshadhri, 2009; Zhang et al.,
2018), wherein the true hypothesis may be changing over time.
The main goal of a learning algorithm for problem (1) is to generate a sequence of points
fxtg that minimize some natural performance metric. To make progress, we impose the
standard assumption that each function ft is µ-strongly convex with L-Lipschitz continuous
gradient, while each regularizer rt is proper, closed, and convex. The online proximal
stochastic gradient method (PSG) naturally applies to the sequence of problems (1). At
each iteration t, the method simply takes the step
xt+1 = proxηtrt(xt − ηtgt);
where the vector gt is an unbiased estimator of the true gradient of ft at xt, the step
size (learning rate) ηt > 0 is user-specified, and proxηtrt(·) is the proximal map of the
scaled regularizer ηtrt. In this work, we analyze two types of tracking error for PSG: the
squared distance kxt − x? t k2 and the suboptimality gap ’t(x^t) − ’t(x? t ). Here, x? t denotes
the minimizer of the function ’t which may evolve stochastically in time, and x^t denotes a
weighted average of iterates up to time t. We next outline the main results of the paper;
the results in Sections 1.1 and 1.2 below appeared in a preliminary version of this paper at
NeurIPS (Cutler et al., 2021).
2Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
1.1 Tracking the Minimizer
We begin with a simple bound on distance tracking of the constant-step PSG:
Ekxt − x? t k2 . (1 − µη)tkx0 − x? 0k2
| {z }
optimization
+
ησ2
µ
|{z}
noise
+ µη ∆ 2
| {z }
drift
: (2)
Here η 2 (0; 1=2L] is the constant step size used by PSG, σ2 upper-bounds the variance of
the stochastic gradient, and ∆2 upper-bounds the minimizer variations Ekx? t − x? t+1k2; the
symbol . indicates an inequality that holds up to an absolute constant factor, i.e., up to
multiplying the upper bound by a positive numerical constant independent of the problem
parameters. Inequality (2) asserts that the tracking error Ekxt − x? t k2 decays linearly in time
t, until it reaches the \noise + drift" error ησ2=µ + (∆=µη)2. Notice that the \noise + drift"
error cannot be made arbitrarily small by tuning η. This is perfectly in line with intuition:
a step size η that is too small prevents the algorithm from catching up with the minimizers
x?
t . We note that the individual error terms due to the optimization and noise are classically
known to be tight for PSG; tightness of the drift term is proved by Madden et al. (2021,
Theorem 3.2). Though the estimate (2) is likely known, we were unable to find a precise
reference in this generality.
Letting t tend to infinity in (2), the optimization error tends to zero, leaving only the
\noise + drift" term. Optimizing this remaining term over η, it is natural to define the
asymptotic distance tracking error of PSG and the corresponding optimal learning rate as
E := min
η2(0;1=2L] (ησ2
µ
+ µη ∆ 2) and η? := min (21L; 2∆2
µσ2 1=3):
Two regimes of variation are brought to light: the high drift-to-noise regime ∆=σ ≥ pµ=16L3,
and the low drift-to-noise regime ∆=σ < pµ=16L3. The high drift-to-noise regime is
uninteresting from the viewpoint of stochastic optimization because in this case the optimal
learning rate η? ≍ 1=L is as large as in the deterministic setting (here, the symbol ≍ indicates
an equality that holds up to an absolute constant factor). In contrast, the low drift-to-noise
regime is interesting because it necessitates using a smaller learning rate η? ≍ (∆2=µσ2)1=3
that exhibits a nontrivial scaling with the problem parameters. Consequently, for the rest of
the introduction we focus on the low drift-to-noise regime.
A central question is to find a learning rate schedule that achieves a tracking error
Ekxt − x? t k2 that is within a constant factor of E in the shortest possible time. The simplest
strategy is to execute PSG with the constant learning rate η?. Then a direct application of
(2) yields the efficiency estimate Ekxt − x? t k2 . E in time t . (σ2=µ2E) log(kx0 − x? 0k2=E).
This efficiency estimate can be significantly improved by gradually decaying the learning
rate using a \step decay schedule", wherein the algorithm is implemented in epochs with the
new learning rate chosen to be the midpoint between the current learning rate and η?. Such
schedules are well known to improve efficiency in the static (stationary objective) setting,
as was discovered by Ghadimi and Lan (2013), and can be used here. The end result is an
algorithm that produces a point xt satisfying
Ekxt − x? t k2 . E in time t . L
µ
logkx0 − x? 0k2
E  + σ2
µ2E : (3)
3Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
This efficiency estimate is remarkably similar to that in the static setting (Ghadimi and Lan,
2013), with E playing the role of the target accuracy ". An elementary computation shows
that (3) improves the constant learning rate efficiency estimate when E is small, e.g., when
E ≤ kx0 − x? 0k2=e2, where e denotes Euler’s number.
The efficiency estimate (3) is a baseline guarantee for PSG with step decay. Since the
result is stated in terms of the expected tracking error Ekxt − x? t k2, it is only meaningful if
the entire algorithm can be repeated from scratch multiple times on the same problem.1
However, there is no shortage of situations in which a learning algorithm is operating in
real time and the time drift is irreversible; in such settings, the algorithm may only be
executed once. These situations call for efficiency estimates that hold with high probability,
rather than only in expectation. With this in mind, we show that under mild light-tail
assumptions, PSG with step decay produces a point xt satisfying kxt − x? t k2 . E log (1=δ)
with probability at least 1 − δ in the same order of iterations as in (3). The proof follows
closely the probabilistic techniques developed by Harvey et al. (2019) for bounding moment
generating functions.
1.2 Tracking the Minimum Value
The results outlined so far have focused on tracking the minimizer x? t ; stronger guarantees
may be obtained for tracking the minimum value ’? t . To this end, we require stronger
assumptions on the variation of the functions ft beyond control on the minimizer drift
kx? t − x? t+1k2. Similar in spirit to the measure of cumulative gradient variation in the
dynamic online learning literature (e.g., see Jadbabaie et al., 2015), we will be concerned
with the gradient drift
Gi;t := sup
x
krfi(x) − rft(x)k
and assume the bound E[G2 i;t=µ2] ≤ ∆2ji−tj2 for all times i and t. Thus, the second moment
of the gradient drift is assumed to grow at most quadratically in the time horizon. Assuming
henceforth that the regularizers rt ≡ r are identical for all times t, this condition on the
gradient drift implies the weaker assumption Ekx? t − x? t+1k2 ≤ ∆2 used in Section 1.1.
Analogous to (2), we show that PSG generates a point x^t (an average iterate) satisfying
E’t(^ xt) − ’? t . 1 − µη 2 t’0(x0) − ’? 0
| {z }
optimization
+ ησ2
|{z}
noise
+
∆2
µη2
|{z}
drift
:
This estimate again decouples nicely into three terms, signifying the error due to optimization,
gradient noise, and time drift. Taking the limit as t tends to infinity, we obtain the asymptotic
function gap tracking error G := µE. Similar to (3), we show that PSG with step decay
produces a point ^ xt satisfying
E’t(^ xt) − ’? t . G in time t . L
µ
log’0(x0) − ’? 0
G  + σ2
µG : (4)
1. Specifically, error bounds holding in expectation yield concentration inequalities for the average of i.i.d.
errors arising from executing a stochastic algorithm multiple times from scratch on the same problem
(e.g., via Chebyshev’s inequality); if the algorithm cannot be executed in this fashion to generate i.i.d.
errors, then alternative high-probability error bounds are called for.
4Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Again, the similarity to the static setting (Ghadimi and Lan, 2013), with G playing the role of
a target accuracy, is striking. We then provide a high-probability extension of this estimate:
under mild light-tail assumptions, PSG with step decay produces a point x^t satisfying
’t(x^t) − ’? t . G log(1=δ) with probability at least 1 − δ in the same order of iterations as in
(4) up to a factor of log log(1=δ). The proofs are based on the generalized Freedman inequality
of Harvey et al. (2019)|a remarkably flexible tool for analyzing stochastic gradient-type
algorithms.
1.3 Extension to Decision-Dependent Problems with Time Drift
We have so far focused on stochastic optimization problems that undergo a temporal shift.
A primary reason for this phenomenon in machine learning, and data science more broadly,
is that data distributions often evolve in time independently of the learning process. Recent
literature, on the other hand, highlights a different source of distributional shift due to
decision-dependent or performative effects. Namely, the distribution generating the data in
iteration t may depend on, or react to, the current \decision" xt. For example, deployment
of a classifier by a learning system, when made public, often causes the population to adapt
their attributes in order to increase the likelihood of being positively labeled|a process
called \gaming". Even when the population is agnostic to the classifier, the decisions
made by the learning system (e.g., loan approval) may inadvertently alter the profile of
the population (e.g., credit score). The goal of the learning system therefore is to find a
classifier that generalizes well under the response distribution. Recent research in strategic
classification (Hardt et al., 2016; Br¨uckner et al., 2012; Bechavod et al., 2021; Dalvi et al.,
2004) and performative prediction (Perdomo et al., 2020; Mendler-D¨unner et al., 2020) has
highlighted the prevalence of this phenomenon.
Combining time-dependence and decision-dependence yields a class of problems (1) where
the loss function ft(x) takes the special form ft(x) = Eξ∼D(t;x)‘(x; ξ). Here D(t; x) is a
distribution that depends on both time t and the decision variable x. Thus for any fixed
time t, the problem (1) becomes the performative risk problem considered by Perdomo et al.
(2020) and Mendler-D¨unner et al. (2020). Following this line of work, instead of tracking the
true minimizer of ’t|typically a challenging task|we will settle for tracking the equilibrium
points ¯ xt. These are the points satisfying
x¯t 2 argmin
x
E
ξ∼D(t;x¯t)
‘(x; ξ) + r(x):
Equilibrium points are sure to exist and are unique under mild Lipschitzness and strong
convexity assumptions. We refer the reader to Perdomo et al. (2020) for a compelling motivation for considering such equilibrium points. The problem of tracking equilibrium points
is yet again an instance of (1), but now with the different function ft(x) = Eξ∼D(t;x¯t)‘(x; ξ)
induced by the equilibrium distributions. The PSG algorithm is not directly applicable here
since the learner cannot typically sample from D(t; x¯t) directly. Instead, a natural algorithm
for this problem class draws in each iteration t a sample ξt from the current distribution
D(t; xt) and declares xt+1 = proxηtr(xt − ηtr‘(xt; ξt)). Notice that the sample gradient
r‘(xt; ξt) is a biased estimator of the true gradient rft(xt) = Eξ∼D(t;x¯t)r‘(xt; ξ) because ξt
is sampled from the wrong distribution. Nonetheless, as pointed out by Drusvyatskiy and
Xiao (2022), the gradient bias is small for any fixed time, decaying linearly with the distance
5Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
to x¯t. Using this perspective, we show that all guarantees for PSG in the time-dependent
setting naturally extend to this biased PSG algorithm for tracking equilibrium points, with
essentially no loss in efficiency.
1.4 Related Work
Our current work fits within the broader literature on stochastic tracking, online optimization
with dynamic regret, high-probability guarantees in stochastic optimization, and performative
prediction. We now survey the most relevant literature in these areas.
Stochastic tracking. Stochastic optimization with time drift was considered soon after
the Robbins-Monro approach for stochastic optimization was introduced; see Kushner and
Yin (1997) for a survey. Early results can be traced back to Dupaˇc (1965) in sequential
estimation and Gaivoronskii (1978) in stochastic optimization; see also Fujita and Fukao
(1972), Ruppert (1979), Tsypkin and Nikolic (1971), Tsypkin and Polyak (1992), and Uosaki
(1974). Stochastic algorithms have also been extensively studied as adaptive algorithms for
stochastic tracking (Tsypkin and Nikolic, 1971; Kushner and Yin, 1997; Benveniste et al.,
1990), for their ability to indeed track parameters under time drift. Most works have focused
on the so-called least mean-squares (LMS) algorithm and its variants, which can be viewed
as a stochastic gradient method on a least-squares loss-based objective. Other stochastic
algorithms that have been studied in these settings with a larger cost per iteration include
recursive least-squares and related Kalman filtering algorithms (Guo and Ljung, 1995).
Recent works have revisited these methods from a more modern viewpoint (Besbes
et al., 2015; Wilson et al., 2019; Madden et al., 2021). In particular, the paper of Madden
et al. (2021) focuses on (accelerated) gradient methods for deterministic tracking problems,
while Wilson et al. (2019) present a framework for online stochastic gradient methods with
parameter estimation. The work of Besbes et al. (2015) analyzes the dynamic regret of
stochastic algorithms for time-varying problems, focusing both on lower and upper complexity
bounds. Though the proof techniques in our paper share many aspects with those available
in the literature, the results we obtain are distinct. In particular, the guarantees (3) and (4)
for PSG with step decay, along with their high-probability variants, are new to the best of
our knowledge.
Online optimization with dynamic regret. Online optimization for sequences of
convex objectives with domain X has been studied through the lens of adaptive regret
(Hazan and Seshadhri, 2009; Daniely et al., 2015) and dynamic regret (Besbes et al., 2015;
Zinkevich, 2003; Zhang et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2020; Jadbabaie et al., 2015; Mokhtari et al.,
2016). The adaptive regret
sup
[r;s]⊂[T ] (Xt=sr ft(xt) − inf
x2X
sX t=r
ft(x))
reads as the maximum static regret over any contiguous time interval; more relevant to our
analysis is the dynamic regret
Reg? T =
TX t
=1
ft(xt) − ft(x? t );
6Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
which reads as the cumulative difference between the instantaneous loss and the minimum
loss. More generally, one can consider the dynamic regret against an arbitrary comparator
sequence futgT t=1 in X , given by
RegT (u1; : : : ; uT ) =
TX t
=1
ft(xt) − ft(ut):
Jadbabaie et al. (2015) apply an adaptive step size strategy to an optimistic mirror
descent algorithm, thereby obtaining a comprehensive dynamic regret guarantee for Reg? T in
terms of the cumulative loss variation VT = PT t=2 supx2X jft(x) − ft−1(x)j, the cumulative
gradient variation DT = PT t=1 krft(xt) − Mtk2 using a causally predictable sequence Mt
available to the algorithm prior to time t (e.g., Mt = rft−1(xt−1)), and the cumulative
minimizer variation C?
T = PT t=2 kx? t − x? t−1k. Under strong convexity, Mokhtari et al. (2016)
show that online projected gradient descent satisfies Reg? T ≤ O(1 + CT? ). For convex losses
with bounded domain X , Zhang et al. (2018) present an adaptive online gradient method
that achieves an optimal dynamic regret bound in terms of the cumulative comparator
variation CT = PT t=2 kut − ut−1k, namely, RegT (u1; : : : ; uT ) ≤ OpT(1 + CT ). This last
guarantee is enhanced by Zhao et al. (2020) through exploiting smoothness to replace the
time horizon T by problem-dependent quantities that are at most O(T) but often much
smaller in easy problems.
As is standard in the dynamic online optimization literature, the preceding works assume
that either the losses ft(x) or their gradients rft(x) are uniformly bounded in both t and x,
and a priori knowledge of these uniform bounds is required for the aforementioned guarantees.
In contrast, we take great care to make no such uniform boundedness assumptions and we
work instead with bounded second moments or light tails of minimizer or gradient drift, which
we allow to evolve stochastically. Furthermore, we only assume stochastic gradient access,
and the presence of stochasticity in the drift and the gradient noise requires guarantees that
hold both in expectation and with high probability. Our bounds depend on a characteristic
quantity of the problem difficulty encapsulating the drift and the noise level and hence
delineate two regimes depending on the drift-to-noise ratio. In general, regret bounds do
not entail last-iterate bounds of the type presented in our work.
High-probability guarantees in stochastic optimization. A large part of our work
revolves around high-probability guarantees for stochastic optimization. Classical references
on the subject in static settings and for minimizing regret in online optimization include the
work of Bartlett et al. (2008), Hazan and Kale (2014), Lan (2012), and Rakhlin et al. (2012).
There exists a variety of techniques for establishing high-probability guarantees based on
Freedman’s inequality and doubling tricks (e.g., see Bartlett et al., 2008; Hazan and Kale,
2014). A more recent line of work by Harvey et al. (2019) establishes a generalized Freedman
inequality that is custom-tailored for analyzing stochastic gradient-type methods and results
in the best known high-probability guarantees. Our arguments closely follow the paradigm
of Harvey et al. (2019) based on the generalized Freedman inequality.
Performative prediction and decision-dependent learning. Recent works on strategic classification (Hardt et al., 2016; Br¨uckner et al., 2012; Bechavod et al., 2021; Dalvi
et al., 2004) and performative prediction (Perdomo et al., 2020; Mendler-D¨unner et al., 2020)
have highlighted the importance of strategic behavior in machine learning. That is, common
7Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
learning systems exhibit a feedback mechanism, wherein the distribution generating the
data in iteration t may depend on, or react to, the current \decision" of an algorithm xt.
The recent paper by Perdomo et al. (2020) put forth an elegant framework for thinking
about such problems, while Mendler-D¨unner et al. (2020) develop stochastic algorithms for
this setting. The subsequent work of Drusvyatskiy and Xiao (2022) shows that a variety of
stochastic algorithms for performative prediction can be understood as biased variants of
the same algorithms on a certain static problem in equilibrium. Building on the techniques
of Drusvyatskiy and Xiao (2022), we show how all our results for time-dependent problems
extend to problems that simultaneously depend on time and on the decision variable. We
note that during the final stage of completing this paper, the closely related and complementary work by Wood et al. (2022) was posted on arXiv.2 The paper by Wood et al.
(2022) considers decision-dependent projected stochastic gradient descent under time drift
in the distributional framework proposed by Perdomo et al. (2020), establishing distance
tracking bounds in expectation and with high probability under sub-Weibull gradient noise.
In particular, the light-tail assumption on gradient noise used by Wood et al. (2022) for
obtaining high-probability guarantees is more general than the one in our paper. On the
other hand, we analyze tracking of both the minimizer and the minimum value of more
general stochastically evolving objectives, allow presence of general convex regularizers, and
propose a step decay schedule for improved efficiency.
1.5 Outline
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 formalizes the problem setting of timedependent stochastic optimization and records the relevant assumptions. Sections 3{5
summarize the main results of the paper. Specifically, Section 3 focuses on efficiency
estimates for tracking the minimizer, Section 4 focuses on efficiency estimates for tracking
the minimum value, and Section 5 develops an extension to the decision-dependent setting via
tracking equilibria. Section 6 presents the proofs of the main results in a unified framework.
Illustrative numerical results appear in Section 7. Appendix A describes the averaging
technique used for tracking function values, and additional proofs appear in Appendix B.
2. Framework and Assumptions
Throughout Sections 2{4, we consider the sequence of stochastic optimization problems
min
x2Rd
’t(x) := ft(x) + rt(x) (5)
indexed by time t 2 N, where Rd denotes a fixed d-dimensional Euclidean space with inner
product h·; ·i and Euclidean norm kxk = phx; xi, and the following standard regularity
assumptions hold:
(i) Each function ft : Rd ! R is µ-strongly convex and C1-smooth with L-Lipschitz
continuous gradient for some common parameters µ; L > 0.
2. More precisely, a short version of our paper (Cutler et al., 2021) was submitted to NeurIPS in May ’21,
the paper by Wood et al. (2022) appeared on arXiv in July ’21, and our full paper was posted on arXiv
in August ’21. Our paper (Cutler et al., 2021) was presented at NeurIPS in December ’21.
8Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
(ii) Each regularizer rt : Rd ! R [ f1g is proper, closed, and convex.3
The minimizer and minimum value of ’t will be denoted by x? t and ’? t , respectively. We
will be concerned with settings in which ’t evolves stochastically in time. As motivation, we
describe two classical examples of (5) that are worth keeping in mind and that guide our
framework: stochastic tracking of a drifting target and online learning under distributional
drift.
Example 1 (Stochastic tracking of a drifting target) The problem of stochastic
tracking, related to the filtering problem in signal processing, is to track a moving target x? t
from observations
bt = ct(x? t ) + t;
where ct(·) is a known measurement map and t is a mean-zero noise vector. A typical
time-dependent problem formulation takes the form
min
x
Et
‘t(bt − ct(x)) + rt(x);
where the loss ‘t(·) derives from the distribution of t and the regularizer rt(·) encodes
available side information about the target x? t . Common choices for rt are the 1-norm and
the squared 2-norm. The motion of the target x? t is typically driven by a random walk or a
diffusion (Guo and Ljung, 1995; Sayed, 2003).
Example 2 (Online learning under distributional drift) The problem of online
learning under distributional drift is to learn while the data distribution changes over time.
More formally, a typical problem formulation takes the form
min
x
E
ξ∼D(vt)
‘(x; ξ) + r(x);
where D(vt) is a data distribution that depends on an unknown parameter sequence fvtg,
which itself may evolve stochastically.
The main goal of a learning algorithm for problem (5) is to generate a sequence of points
fxtg that minimize some natural performance metric. The most prevalent performance
metrics in the literature are the tracking error and the dynamic regret. We will focus on
two types of tracking error: the squared distance kxt − x? tk2 and the suboptimality gap
’t(^ xt) − ’t(x? t ), where ^ xt denotes a weighted average of iterates up to time t.
We make the standing assumption that at every time t, and at every query point x,
the learner can select an unbiased estimator reft(x) of the true gradient rft(x) in order to
proceed with a stochastic gradient-like optimization algorithm. With this oracle access, the
online proximal stochastic gradient method|recorded as Algorithm 1 below|selects in each
iteration t the stochastic gradient gt = reft(xt) and takes the step
xt+1 := proxηtrt(xt − ηtgt) = argmin
u2Rd
nrt(u) + 21ηtku − (xt − ηtgt)k2o
using step size ηt > 0. The goal of our work is to obtain efficiency estimates for this procedure
that hold both in expectation and with high probability.
3. We assume dom ft = Rd for simplicity, but this is not essential. For example, it suffices to assume that
each function ft : Rd ! R [ f1g is closed and µ-strongly convex and that there exists an open convex
set U ⊂ Rd such that for all t 2 N, dom rt ⊂ U ⊂ dom ft and ft is L-smooth on U.
9Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Algorithm 1 Online Proximal Stochastic Gradient PSG(x0; fηtg; T)
Input: initial x0 and step sizes fηtgT −1
t=0 ⊂ (0; 1)
Step t = 0; : : : ; T − 1:
Select gt = reft(xt)
Set xt+1 = proxηtrt(xt − ηtgt)
Return xT
The guarantees we obtain allow both the iterates xt and the minimizers x? t to evolve
stochastically. This is convenient for example when tracking a moving target x? t whose
motion may be governed by a stochastic process such as a random walk or a diffusion
(Example 1), or when tracking the minimizer of an expected loss over a stochastically
evolving data distribution (Example 2). Given fxtg and fgtg as in Algorithm 1, we let
zt := rft(xt) − gt
denote the gradient noise at time t and we impose the following assumption modeling
stochasticity on a fixed probability space (Ω; F; P) throughout Sections 2{4.
Assumption 1 (Stochastic framework) There exists a probability space (Ω; F; P) with
filtration (Ft)t≥0 such that F0 = f;; Ωg and the following two conditions hold for all t ≥ 0:
(i) xt; x? t : Ω ! Rd are Ft-measurable.
(ii) zt : Ω ! Rd is Ft+1-measurable with E[zt j Ft] = 0.
The first item of Assumption 1 formalizes the assertion that xt and x? t are fully determined
by information up to time t. The second item of Assumption 1 formalizes the assertion
that the gradient noise zt is fully determined by information up to time t + 1 and has
zero mean conditioned on the information up to time t, i.e., gt is an unbiased estimator of
rft(xt); for example, this holds naturally in Example 2 under typical regularity assumptions
if gt = r‘(xt; ξt) with ξt ∼ D(vt), where r‘(xt; ξt) denotes the gradient of ‘(·; ξt) at xt.
Efficiency estimates for Algorithm 1 must clearly take into account the variation of
the problem (5) in time t. One of the standard metrics for measuring this variation is the
minimizer drift
∆t := kx? t − x? t+1k:
Another popular metric is the gradient drift
sup
x
krft(x) − rft+1(x)k:
Our efficiency estimates for tracking the minimizer will depend on the minimizer drift, while
our efficiency estimates for tracking the minimum value will depend on the gradient drift.
As the following elementary lemma shows, the minimizer drift scaled by µ is dominated by
the gradient drift whenever the regularizers do not vary in time.4
4. Lemma 1 provides a bound similar in spirit to the bound µkx? i − x? t k2 ≤ 4 supx2dom r jfi(x) − ft(x)j in
terms of variation in function value, which is also an elementary consequence of µ-strong convexity (e.g.,
see Zhao and Zhang, 2021, Section 4.1).
10Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Lemma 1 (Minimizer vs. gradient drift) Suppose that i and t are indices for which
the regularizers ri and rt are identical. Then
µkx? i − x? t k ≤ krfi(x? t ) − rft(x? t )k:
Proof Let r denote the common regularizer: r = ri = rt. Then the first-order optimality
condition
0 2 @’t(x? t ) = rft(x? t ) + @r(x? t )
implies −rft(x? t ) 2 @r(x? t ), so the vector v := rfi(x? t ) − rft(x? t ) lies in @’i(x? t ). Hence the
µ-strong convexity of ’i and the inclusion 0 2 @’i(x? i ) imply µkx? i − x? t k ≤ k0 − vk.
3. Tracking the Minimizer
This section presents bounds on the tracking error kxt−x? t k2 that are valid both in expectation
and with high probability under light-tail assumptions. Further, we show that a geometrically
decaying learning rate schedule may be superior to a constant learning rate in terms of
efficiency.
3.1 Bounds in Expectation
We begin with bounding the expected value Ekxt − x? t k2. Proofs appear in Section 6.1. The
starting point for our analysis is the following standard one-step improvement guarantee.
Lemma 2 (One-step improvement) For all x 2 Rd, the iterates fxtg produced by Algorithm 1 with ηt < 1=L satisfy the bound:
2ηt(’t(xt+1) − ’t(x)) ≤ (1 − µηt)kxt − xk2 − kxt+1 − xk2 + 2ηthzt; xt − xi + ηt2
1−Lηt kztk2:
For simplicity, we state the main results under the assumption that the second moments
E ∆2
t and Ekztk2 are uniformly bounded; more general guarantees that take into account
weighted averages of the moments and allow for time-dependent learning rates follow from
Lemma 2 as well.
Assumption 2 (Bounded second moments) There exist constants ∆; σ > 0 such that
the following two conditions hold for all t ≥ 0:
(i) (Drift) The minimizer drift ∆t satisfies E ∆2 t ≤ ∆2.
(ii) (Noise) The gradient noise zt satisfies Ekztk2 ≤ σ2.
The following theorem establishes an expected improvement guarantee for Algorithm 1,
and serves as the basis for much of what follows.
Theorem 3 (Expected distance) Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Then the iterates
produced by Algorithm 1 with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L satisfy the bound:
Ekxt − x? t k2 . (1 − µη)tkx0 − x? 0k2
| {z }
optimization
+
ησ2
µ
|{z}
noise
+ µη ∆ 2
| {z }
drift
:
11Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Interplay of optimization, noise, and drift. Theorem 3 states that when using a
constant learning rate, the error Ekxt − x? t k2 decays linearly in time t, until it reaches the
\noise + drift" error ησ2=µ + (∆=µη)2. Notice that the \noise + drift" error cannot be made
arbitrarily small. This is perfectly in line with intuition: a learning rate that is too small
prevents the algorithm from catching up with x? t . We note that the individual error terms
due to the optimization and noise are classically known to be tight for PSG; tightness of the
drift term is proved by Madden et al. (2021, Theorem 3.2).
With Theorem 3 in hand, we define the asymptotic tracking error of Algorithm 1
corresponding to Ekxt − x? t k2, together with the corresponding optimal step size:
E := min
η2(0;1=2L] (ησ2
µ
+ µη ∆ 2) and η? := min (21L; 2∆2
µσ2 1=3):
Plugging η? into the definition of E, we see that Algorithm 1 exhibits qualitatively different
behaviors in settings with high or low drift-to-noise ratio ∆=σ. Explicitly,
E ≍
8><>:
σ2
µL + Lµ∆2 if ∆σ ≥ q µ
16L3
∆σ2
µ2 2=3 otherwise:
Two regimes of variation are brought to light by the above computation: the high driftto-noise regime ∆=σ ≥ pµ=16L3 and the low drift-to-noise regime ∆=σ < pµ=16L3. The
high drift-to-noise regime is uninteresting from the viewpoint of stochastic optimization
because in this case the optimal learning rate η? ≍ 1=L is as large as in the deterministic
setting. In contrast, the low drift-to-noise regime is interesting because it necessitates using
a smaller learning rate η? ≍ (∆2=µσ2)1=3 that exhibits a nontrivial scaling with the problem
parameters.
Learning rate vs. rate of variation. A central question is to find a learning rate
schedule that achieves a tracking error Ekxt − x? t k2 that is within a constant factor of
E in the shortest possible time. The answer is clear in the high drift-to-noise regime
∆=σ ≥ pµ=16L3. Indeed, in this case, Theorem 3 directly implies that Algorithm 1 with
the constant learning rate η? = 1=2L will find a point xt satisfying Ekxt − x? t k2 . E in
time t . (L=µ) log(kx0 − x? 0k2=E). Notice that this efficiency estimate is logarithmic in 1=E;
intuitively, the reason for the absence of a sublinear component is that the error due to the
drift ∆ dominates the error due to the variance σ2 in the stochastic gradient.
The low drift-to-noise regime ∆=σ < pµ=16L3 is more subtle. Namely, the simplest
strategy is to execute Algorithm 1 with the constant learning rate η? = (2∆2=µσ2)1=3.
Then a direct application of Theorem 3 yields the estimate Ekxt − x? t k2 . E in time
t . (σ2=µ2E) log(kx0 − x? 0k2=E). This efficiency estimate can be significantly improved by
gradually decaying the learning rate using a \step decay schedule", wherein the algorithm is
implemented in epochs with the new learning rate chosen to be the midpoint between the
current learning rate and η?. Such schedules are well known to improve efficiency in the
static setting, as was discovered by Ghadimi and Lan (2013), and can be used here. The
end result is the following theorem; see Theorem 28 for the formal statement.
Theorem 4 (Time to track in expectation, informal) Suppose that Assumption 2
holds. Then there is a learning rate schedule fηtg such that Algorithm 1 produces a point xt
12Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
satisfying
Ekxt − x? t k2 . E in time t . L
µ
logkx0 − x? 0k2
E  + σ2
µ2E :
The efficiency estimate in Theorem 4 is strikingly similar to the efficiency estimate in
the static setting (Ghadimi and Lan, 2013), with E playing the role of the target accuracy ".
An elementary computation shows that in the low drift-to-noise regime, Theorem 4 improves
the constant learning rate efficiency estimate when E is small, e.g., when E ≤ kx0 − x? 0k2=e2.
Theorems 3 and 4 provide useful baseline guarantees for the performance of Algorithm 1.
Nonetheless, these guarantees are all stated in terms of the expected tracking error Ekxt−x? t k2,
and are therefore only meaningful if the entire algorithm can be repeated from scratch
multiple times. There is no shortage of situations in which a learning algorithm is operating
in real time and the time drift is irreversible; in such settings, the algorithm may only be
executed once. These situations call for efficiency estimates that hold with high probability,
rather than only in expectation.
3.2 High-Probability Guarantees
We next present high-probability guarantees for the tracking error kxt − x? t k2. Proofs appear
in Section 6.2. We make the following standard light-tail assumptions on the minimizer drift
and gradient noise (Harvey et al., 2019; Lan, 2012; Nemirovski et al., 2009).
Assumption 3 (Sub-Gaussian drift and noise) There exist constants ∆; σ > 0 such
that the following two conditions hold for all t ≥ 0:
(i) (Drift) The drift ∆2 t is sub-exponential conditioned on Ft with parameter ∆2:
Eexp(λ∆2 t ) j Ft ≤ exp(λ∆2) for all 0 ≤ λ ≤ ∆−2:
(ii) (Noise) The noise zt is norm sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft with parameter σ=2:
Pkztk ≥ τ j Ft ≤ 2 exp(−2τ2=σ2) for all τ > 0:
Note that the first item of Assumption 3 is equivalent to asserting that the minimizer
drift ∆t is sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft (see Vershynin, 2018, Lemma 2.7.6). Clearly
Assumption 3 implies Assumption 2 with the same constants ∆; σ. It is worthwhile to note
some common settings in which Assumption 3 holds; the claims in Remark 5 below follow
from standard results on sub-Gaussian random variables (Jin et al., 2019; Vershynin, 2018).
Remark 5 (Common settings for Assumption 3) Fix constants ∆; σ > 0. If ∆t is
bounded by ∆, then clearly ∆2 t is sub-exponential (conditioned on Ft) with parameter ∆2.
Similarly, if kztk is bounded by σ=2, then zt is norm sub-Gaussian (conditioned on Ft)
with parameter σ=2 (by Markov’s inequality). Alternatively, if the increment x? t − x? t+1
is mean-zero sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft with parameter ∆=pd, then x? t − x? t+1 is
mean-zero norm sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft with parameter 2p2 · ∆ and hence ∆2 t is
sub-exponential conditioned on Ft with parameter c · ∆2 for some absolute constant c > 0.
Similarly, if zt is sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft with parameter σ=4p2d, then zt is norm
sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft with parameter σ=2.
13Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
The following theorem shows that if Assumption 3 holds, then the expected bound on
kxt − x? t k2 derived in Theorem 3 holds with high probability.
Theorem 6 (High-probability distance tracking) Let fxtg be the iterates produced by
Algorithm 1 with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L, and suppose that Assumption 3 holds.
Then there is an absolute constant c > 0 such that for any specified t 2 N and δ 2 (0; 1), the
following estimate holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
kxt − x? t k2 ≤ 1 − µη 2 tkx0 − x? 0k2 + c ησ2
µ
+ µη ∆ 2! logδe:
The proof of Theorem 6 employs a technique used by Harvey et al. (2019). The idea is to
build a careful recursion for the moment generating function of kxt − x? t k2, leading to a onesided sub-exponential tail bound. As a consequence of Theorem 6, we can again implement
a step decay schedule to obtain the following efficiency estimate with high probability; see
Theorem 31 for the formal statement.
Theorem 7 (Time to track with high probability, informal) Suppose that Assumption 3 holds and that we are in the low drift-to-noise regime ∆=σ < pµ=16L3. Then there
is a learning rate schedule fηtg such that for any specified δ 2 (0; 1), Algorithm 1 produces a
point xt satisfying
kxt − x? t k2 . E logδe
with probability at least 1 − δ in time
t . L
µ
logkx0 − x? 0k2
E  + σ2
µ2E :
4. Tracking the Minimum Value
The results outlined so far have focused on tracking the minimizer x? t . In this section, we
present results for tracking the minimum value ’? t . These two goals are fundamentally
different. Generally speaking, good bounds on the function gap along with strong convexity
imply good bounds on the distance to the minimizer; the reverse implication is false. To this
end, we require a stronger assumption on the variation of the functions ft in time t: rather
than merely controlling the minimizer drift ∆t, we will assume control on the gradient drift
Gi;t := sup
x
krfi(x) − rft(x)k:
Our strategy is to track the minimum value along the running average x^t of the iterates
xt produced by Algorithm 1, as defined in Algorithm 2 below. The reason behind using this
particular running average is brought to light in Section 6.3, where we apply a standard
averaging technique (Appendix A) to a one-step improvement along xt (Lemma 32) to obtain
the desired progress along ^ xt (Proposition 33).
4.1 Bounds in Expectation
We begin with bounding the expected value E[’t(x^t) − ’? t ]. Proofs appear in Section 6.3.
Analogous to Assumption 2, we make the following assumption regarding drift and noise.
14Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Algorithm 2 Averaged Online Proximal Stochastic Gradient PSG(x0; µ; fηtg; T)
Input: initial x0 = ^ x0, strong convexity parameter µ, and step sizes fηtgT −1
t=0 ⊂ (0; 1=µ)
Step t = 0; : : : ; T − 1:
Select gt = reft(xt)
Set xt+1 = proxηtrt(xt − ηtgt)
Set ^ xt+1 = 1 − µηt
2−µηtx^t + µηt
2−µηt xt+1
Return x^T
Assumption 4 (Bounded second moments) The regularizers rt ≡ r are identical for
all times t and there exist constants ∆; σ > 0 such that the following two conditions hold
for all 0 ≤ i < t:
(i) (Drift) The gradient drift Gi;t satisfies E G2 i;t ≤ (µ∆ji − tj)2:
(ii) (Noise) The gradient noise zi satisfies Ekzik2 ≤ σ2 and Ehzi; x? t i = 0.
These two assumptions are natural indeed. Taking into account Lemma 1, it is clear
that Assumption 4 implies the earlier Assumption 2 with the same constants ∆; σ. The
drift assumption intuitively asserts that second moment of Gi;t grows at most quadratically
in time ji − tj. In particular, returning to Example 2, suppose that the distribution
map D(·) is "-Lipschitz continuous in the Wasserstein-1 distance, the loss ‘(·; ξ) is C1-
smooth for all ξ, and the gradient r‘(x; ·) is β-Lipschitz continuous for all x. Then the
Kantorovich-Rubinste˘ın duality theorem (Kantorovich and Rubinshte˘ın, 1958) directly
implies E G2 i;t ≤ ("β)2 Ekvi − vtk2. Therefore, as long as the second moment Ekvi − vtk2
scales quadratically in ji − tj, the desired drift assumption holds. The assumption on the
gradient noise stipulates a uniform bound on the second moment Ekzik2 and that the
condition Ehzi; x? t i = 0 holds. The latter property confers a weak form of uncorrelatedness
between the gradient noise zi and the future minimizer x? t , and holds automatically if the
gradient noise and the minimizers evolve independently of each other, as would typically be
the case for instance in Example 2.
The following theorem establishes an expected improvement guarantee for Algorithm 2.
Theorem 8 (Expected function gap) Let fx^tg be the iterates produced by Algorithm 2
with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L, and suppose that Assumption 4 holds. Then the
following bound holds for all t ≥ 0:
E’t(^ xt) − ’? t . 1 − µη 2 t’0(x0) − ’? 0
| {z }
optimization
+ ησ2
|{z}
noise
+
∆2
µη2
|{z}
drift
:
The \noise + drift" error term in Theorem 8 coincides with µ times the error term in
Theorem 3, as expected. With Theorem 8 in hand, we are led to define the following
asymptotic tracking error of Algorithm 2 corresponding to E[’t(^ xt) − ’? t ]:
G := µE = min
η2(0;1=2L] ησ2 + ∆2
µη2:
15Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
The corresponding asymptotically optimal choice of η is again given by
η? = min (21L; 2∆2
µσ2 1=3);
and the dichotomy governed by the drift-to-noise ratio ∆=σ remains:
G ≍
8<:
σ2
L + (L∆)2
µ
if ∆
σ
≥ q µ
16L3
µ∆σ2
µ2 2=3 otherwise:
In the high drift-to-noise regime ∆=σ ≥ pµ=16L3, Theorem 8 directly implies that
Algorithm 2 with the constant learning rate η? = 1=2L finds a point x^t satisfying
E[’t(^ xt) − ’? t ] . G in time t . (L=µ) log((’0(x0) − ’? 0)=G). In the low drift-to-noise regime
∆=σ < pµ=16L3, another direct application of Theorem 8 shows that Algorithm 2 with the
constant learning rate η? = (2∆2=µσ2)1=3 finds a point x^t satisfying E[’t(x^t) − ’? t ] . G in
time t . (σ2=µG) log((’0(x0)−’? 0)=G). As before, this efficiency estimate can be significantly
improved by implementing a step decay schedule. The end result is the following theorem;
see Theorem 35 for the formal statement.
Theorem 9 (Time to track in expectation, informal) Suppose that Assumption 4
holds. Then there is a learning rate schedule fηtg such that Algorithm 2 produces a point x^t
satisfying
E’t(^ xt) − ’? t . G in time t . L
µ
log’0(x0) − ’? 0
G  + σ2
µG :
In the low drift-to-noise regime, Theorem 9 improves the constant learning rate efficiency
estimate when G is small, e.g., when G ≤ (’0(x0) − ’? 0)=e2.
4.2 High-Probability Guarantees
Next, we obtain high-probability analogues of Theorems 8 and 9. Proofs appear in Section 6.4.
Naturally, such results should rely on light-tail assumptions on the gradient drift Gi;t and
the norm of the gradient noise kzik. We state the guarantees under an assumption of
sub-Gaussian drift and noise (Assumption 5 below). In particular, we require that the
gradient noise zi is mean-zero conditioned on the σ-algebra
Fi;t := σ(Fi; x? t )
for all 0 ≤ i < t; the property E[zi j Fi;t] = 0 would follow from independence of the gradient
noise zi and the future minimizer x? t and is very reasonable in light of Examples 1 and 2.
Assumption 5 (Sub-Gaussian drift and noise) The regularizers rt ≡ r are identical
for all times t and there exist constants ∆; σ > 0 such that the following two conditions hold
for all 0 ≤ i < t:
(i) (Drift) The squared gradient drift G2 i;t is sub-exponential with parameter (µ∆ji − tj)2:
EexpλG2 i;t ≤ expλ(µ∆ji − tj)2 for all 0 ≤ λ ≤ (µ∆ji − tj)−2:
16Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
(ii) (Noise) The gradient noise zi is mean-zero norm sub-Gaussian conditioned on Fi;t
with parameter σ=2, i.e., E[zi j Fi;t] = 0 and
Pkzik ≥ τ j Fi;t ≤ 2 exp(−2τ2=σ2) for all τ > 0:
Clearly the chain of implications holds:
Assumption 5 =) Assumption 4 =) Assumption 2.
The following theorem shows that if Assumption 5 holds, then the expected bound on
’t(^ xt) − ’? t derived in Theorem 8 holds with high probability.
Theorem 10 (Function gap with high probability) Let fx^tg be the iterates produced
by Algorithm 2 with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L, and suppose that Assumption 5 holds.
Then there is an absolute constant c > 0 such that for any specified t 2 N and δ 2 (0; 1), the
following estimate holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
’t(^ xt) − ’? t ≤ c 1 − µη 2 t’0(x0) − ’? 0 + ησ2 + ∆2
µη2 logδe:
The proof of Theorem 10 is based on combining the generalized Freedman inequality of
Harvey et al. (2019) with careful control on the drift and noise in improvement guarantees
for the proximal stochastic gradient method. The key observation is that although we do not
have simple recursive control on the moment generating function of ’t(x^t) − ’? t (as we do
with kxt − x? t k2), we can instead control the tracking error ’t(x^t) − ’? t by leveraging control
on the martingale Pt−1
i=0hzi; xi − x? t iζt−1−i, where ζ = 1 − µη=(2 − µη). This martingale is
self-regulating in the sense that its total conditional variance is bounded by the history of the
process; the generalized Freedman inequality is precisely suited to bound such martingales
with high probability.
With Theorem 10 in hand, we may implement a step decay schedule as before to obtain
the following efficiency estimate; see Theorem 41 for the formal statement.
Theorem 11 (Time to track with high probability, informal) Suppose that Assumption 5 holds and that we are in the low drift-to-noise regime ∆=σ < pµ=16L3. Fix
δ 2 (0; 1). Then there is a learning rate schedule fηtg such that Algorithm 2 produces a
point x^t satisfying
’t(^ xt) − ’? t . G logδe
with probability at least 1 − Kδ in time
t . L
µ
log’0(x0) − ’? 0
G  + σ2
µG loglogδe; where K . log2 L1 · σ2µ
∆2 1=3!:
5. Extension to the Decision-Dependent Setting
In this section, we extend the framework and results of the previous sections to a much
wider class of tracking problems. In particular, the material in this section is a strict
generalization of all the results in the previous sections and can model the performative
prediction framework of Perdomo et al. (2020) in a time-dependent setting.
17Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Setting the stage, suppose that we have a family of functions fft;x(·)g indexed by time
t 2 N and points x 2 Rd. Upon replacing the function ft in the time-dependent problem (5)
by the function ft;x depending not only on the time t but also on the decision variable x, we
obtain the sequence of decision-dependent stochastic optimization problems
min
x2Rd
ft;x(x) + rt(x) (6)
indexed by t. Tracking the solutions to (6) is typically a challenging task due to the dual
dependency of ft;x(x) on the decision x. To obtain a more tractable tracking problem, we
may decouple this dependency on x by introducing an auxiliary decision variable u and
considering the family of stochastic optimization problems
min
u2Rd
ft;x(u) + rt(u) (7)
indexed by both t and x. Instead of tracking the optimal decisions solving (6), our aim
becomes to track the stable decisions
x¯t 2 argmin
u2Rd
ft;x¯t(u) + rt(u) (8)
arising from (7). We call a point x¯t satisfying (8) an equilibrium point of (7) at time t; observe
that x¯t is stable in the sense that it is a fixed point of the map x 7! argminufft;x(u)+ rt(u)g.
Reasonable regularity assumptions on the family fft;x(·)g ensure that (7) admits a
unique equilibrium point at each time t (see Assumption 6 and Lemma 12 below). When
the functions ft;x are independent of x, the equilibrium points are simply the minimizers
of ft + rt|the content of the previous sections. Our goal in this section is to track the
equilibrium points x¯t, or equivalently to track the minimizers of the time-dependent stochastic
optimization problem
min
u2Rd
ft;x¯t(u) + rt(u): (9)
Formally, (9) is an example of (5), but this viewpoint is not directly useful since x¯t is
unknown. This more general framework allows us to model more dynamic settings. The
main example stems from the setting of performative prediction introduced by Perdomo
et al. (2020). This will be a running example throughout the section.
Example 3 (Performative prediction) Within the framework of performative prediction, the functions take the form ft;x(u) = Eξ∼D(t;x)‘(u; ξ) for some family of distributions
D(t; x) indexed by both the time t and the decision variable x. The motivation for the
dependence of the distribution on x is that often deployment of a learning rule parametrized
by x causes the population to change their profile to increase the likelihood of a better
personal outcome|a process called \gaming". In other words, the population data is a
function of the decision taken by the learner. Moreover, the dependence of the population
data on time appears naturally when the population evolves due to exogenous temporal
effects (e.g., seasonal, economic). The equilibrium points x¯t have a clear meaning in this
context. Namely, x¯t is an equilibrium point if the learner has no reason deviate from the
learning rule ¯ xt based on the response distribution D(t; x¯t) alone.
Whenever we refer back to this example, we will impose the following assumptions that
are direct extensions of Perdomo et al. (2020) to the time-dependent setting. Namely, fix
a nonempty metric space M equipped with its Borel σ-algebra and let P1(M) denote the
18Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
space of Radon probability measures on M with finite first moment, equipped with the
Wasserstein-1 distance W1. We make the natural assumption that there exist constants
θ; " ≥ 0 such that the distribution map D(·; ·) satisfies the following Lipschitz condition:
W1D(i; x); D(t; y) ≤ θji − tj + "kx − yk for all (i; x); (t; y) 2 N × Rd:
Moreover, we suppose that the loss function ‘: Rd × M ! R has the following three
properties: ‘(u; ·) 2 L1(π) for all u 2 Rd and π 2 P1(M); ‘(·; ξ) is C1-smooth for all ξ 2 M;
and there is a constant β ≥ 0 such that the map ξ 7! r‘(u; ξ) is β-Lipschitz continuous for
all u 2 Rd, where r‘(u; ξ) denotes the gradient of ‘(·; ξ) evaluated at u. These assumptions
directly imply the following stability property of the gradients with respect to distributional
perturbations (see Drusvyatskiy and Xiao, 2022, Lemma 2.1):
sup
u2Rd
krfi;x(u) − rft;y(u)k ≤ θβji − tj + "βkx − yk for all (i; x); (t; y) 2 N × Rd: (10)
Suppose now that each expected loss ft;x(·) is µ-strongly convex. In this case, Perdomo et al.
(2020) identified the optimal parameter regime "β < µ wherein the repeated minimization
procedure yk+1 = argminufft;yk(u) + rt(u)g converges to the unique equilibrium point x¯t at
a linear rate as k ! 1 (see Perdomo et al., 2020, Theorem 3.5 and Proposition 3.6). The
gradient stability property (10) will lead us to the corresponding parameter regime in our
generalized setting.
5.1 Decision-Dependent Framework
We begin by recording the assumptions of our framework. Similar to the previous sections,
we assume that the following standard regularity conditions hold:
(i) Each function ft;x : Rd ! R is µ-strongly convex and C1-smooth with L-Lipschitz
continuous gradient for some common parameters µ; L > 0.
(ii) Each regularizer rt : Rd ! R [ f1g is proper, closed, and convex.
For each t 2 N and x; u 2 Rd, we let rft;x(u) denote the gradient of the function ft;x(·)
evaluated at u. In order to control the variation of the family fft;x(·)g in the decision
variable x, we introduce the parameter
γ := sup
t2N; u;x;y2Rd
x6=y
krft;x(u) − rft;y(u)k
kx − yk
and impose throughout Section 5 the following stability property of the gradients with
respect to the decision variable.
Assumption 6 (Gradient stability in the decision variable) The following parameter regime holds: γ < µ:
In particular, γ is finite and the following Lipschitz bound holds:
sup
t2N; u2Rd
krft;x(u) − rft;y(u)k ≤ γkx − yk for all x; y 2 Rd:
Returning to Example 3, it follows from (10) that Assumption 6 holds whenever "β < µ.
As the following lemma shows, the requirement γ < µ guarantees that for each t 2 N, the
equilibrium point ¯ xt is well defined and unique.
19Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Lemma 12 (Existence of equilibrium) For each t 2 N, the map St : Rd ! Rd given by
St(x) = argmin
u2Rd
ft;x(u) + rt(u)
is (γ=µ)-contractive and therefore has a unique fixed point x¯t to which the repeated minimization procedure yk+1 = St(yk) converges at a linear rate as k ! 1.
Proof Note first that St is well defined by the strong convexity of each function ’t;x :=
ft;x + rt. Next, given x; y 2 Rd, observe that we have the first-order optimality conditions
0 2 @’t;x(St(x)) and 0 2 @’t;y(St(y)); this last inclusion implies −rft;y(St(y)) 2 @rt(St(y))
and hence rft;x(St(y)) − rft;y(St(y)) 2 @’t;x(St(y)). On the other hand, the µ-strong
convexity of ’t;x implies that for all u; u0 2 dom ’t;x, w 2 @’t;x(u), and w0 2 @’t;x(u0), we
have
µku − u0k ≤ kw − w0k:
Thus, taking u = St(x), w = 0, u0 = St(y), and w0 = rft;x(St(y)) − rft;y(St(y)) yields
µkSt(x) − St(y)k ≤ krft;x(St(y)) − rft;y(St(y))k ≤ γkx − yk;
where the last inequality holds by the definition of γ. Hence kSt(x) − St(y)k ≤ (γ=µ)kx − yk,
so St is (γ=µ)-contractive since γ < µ. An application of the Banach fixed-point theorem
completes the proof.
It is easy to see that the parameter regime γ < µ is optimal in the sense that equilibrium
points can fail to exist whenever γ ≥ µ, as illustrated in the following example.
Example 4 (Optimality of the regime γ < µ) Consider the time-independent family
of functions given by fx(u) = 1 2ku − ax − bk2 for any fixed constant a ≥ 1 and vector b 2 Rd.
Then fx is 1-strongly convex and smooth with 1-Lipschitz continuous gradient, and
γ = sup
u;x;y2Rd
x6=y
krfx(u) − rfy(u)k
kx − yk = a ≥ 1 = µ:
Now let X ⊂ Rd be a nonempty closed convex set and take r = δX to be the convex indicator
of X . Then x¯ is an equilibrium point of the decoupled family of problems minuffx(u)+r(u)g
if and only if
x¯ 2 argmin
u2Rd
ffx¯(u) + r(u)g = fprojX (ax¯ + b)g:
Taking a = 1, b 6= 0, and X = Rd, we see that γ = µ and no equilibrium point exists. On
the other hand, if we take X = Rd + to be the nonnegative orthant and b > 0, then for any
a ≥ 1 and x 2 X we have
x < ax + b = projX (ax + b)
and hence no equilibrium point exists for this problem with any value γ 2 [µ; 1).
Next, we turn to tracking the equilibria x¯t furnished by Lemma 12 using a decisiondependent proximal stochastic gradient method. Specifically, we make the standing assumption that at every time t, and at every query point x, the learner may obtain an unbiased
estimator reft;x(x) of the true gradient rft;x(x). With this oracle access, the decisiondependent proximal stochastic gradient method|recorded as Algorithm 3 below|selects in
20Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
each iteration t the stochastic gradient gt = reft;xt(xt) and takes the step
xt+1 := proxηtrt(xt − ηtgt) = argmin
u2Rd
nrt(u) + 21ηt ku − (xt − ηtgt)k2o
using step size ηt > 0. As before, our goal is to obtain efficiency estimates for this procedure
that hold both in expectation and with high probability.
Algorithm 3 Decision-Dependent PSG D-PSG(x0; fηtg; T )
Input: initial x0 and step sizes fηtgT −1
t=0 ⊂ (0; 1)
Step t = 0; : : : ; T − 1:
Select gt = reft;xt(xt)
Set xt+1 = proxηtrt(xt − ηtgt)
Return xT
The guarantees we obtain allow both the iterates xt and the equilibria x¯t to evolve
stochastically. Given fxtg and fgtg as in Algorithm 3, we let
zt := rft;xt(xt) − gt
denote the gradient noise at time t and we impose the following assumption modeling
stochasticity on a fixed probability space (Ω; F; P) throughout Section 5.
Assumption 7 (Stochastic framework) There exists a probability space (Ω; F; P) with
filtration (Ft)t≥0 such that F0 = f;; Ωg and the following two conditions hold for all t ≥ 0:
(i) xt; x¯t : Ω ! Rd are Ft-measurable.
(ii) zt : Ω ! Rd is Ft+1-measurable with E[zt j Ft] = 0.
The first item of Assumption 7 formalizes the assertion that xt and x¯t are fully determined
by information up to time t. The second item of Assumption 7 formalizes the assertion that
the gradient noise zt is fully determined by information up to time t + 1 and has zero mean
conditioned on the information up to time t, i.e., gt is an unbiased estimator of rft;xt(xt);
for example, this holds naturally in Example 3 if we take gt = r‘(xt; ξt) with ξt ∼ D(t; xt).
Finally, we fix some notation to be used henceforth. We define the positive parameter
µ¯ := µ − γ;
and we define the equilibrium drift ∆¯ t and the temporal gradient drift G¯i;t to be the random
variables
∆¯ t := kx¯t − x¯t+1k and G¯i;t := sup
u;x2Rd
krfi;x(u) − rft;x(u)k:
Note that in the setting of Example 3, the estimate (10) implies G¯i;t ≤ θβji − tj and hence
∆¯ t ≤ θβ=µ¯ by Lemma 1, provided the regularizers rt ≡ r are identical for all times t. We
also set
’t := ft;xt + rt; x? t := argmin ’t; ’? t := min ’t
and
t := ft;x¯t + rt and t? := min t:
21Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
In particular, the equilibrium point x¯t is the minimizer of the equilibrium function t, and
?t
denotes its minimum value. Observe that when γ = 0, we have ’t = t + ct for some
constant of integration ct and hence we recover the setting of Section 2 with x? t = ¯ xt.
5.2 Tracking the Equilibrium Point
In a nutshell, the results of Section 3 extend directly to tracking the equilibrium points x¯t,
with µ replaced by µ¯ and ∆ replaced by ∆¯ (defined in Assumption 8 below). We begin with
bounding the expected value Ekxt − x¯tk2. Due to the fact that Algorithm 3 takes steps on
the current functions ’t but the minimizers we aim to track are those of the equilibrium
functions t, we will rely at the outset on controlling the function gaps
fi;x(u) − fi;x(v) − ft;y(u) − ft;y(v)
(at first for i = t, and later for general i and t). We achieve this control in terms of the
temporal gradient drift.
Lemma 13 (Function gap variation) For all (i; x); (t; y) 2 N × Rd and u; v 2 Rd, we
have
fi;x(u) − fi;x(v) − ft;y(u) − ft;y(v) ≤ G¯i;t + γkx − ykku − vk:
Proof Fix (i; x); (t; y) 2 N × Rd and u; v 2 Rd, and set uτ := v + τ(u − v) for all τ 2 [0; 1].
By the fundamental theorem of calculus and Cauchy-Schwarz, we have
fi;x(u) − fi;x(v) − ft;y(u) − ft;y(v) = Z 1
0
rfi;x(uτ ) − rft;y(uτ ); u − v dτ
≤ G¯i;t + γkx − ykku − vk:
Switching (i; x) and (t; y) completes the proof.
Using Lemmas 2 and 13, we obtain the following equilibrium one-step improvement.
Lemma 14 (Equilibrium one-step improvement) The iterates fxtg produced by Algorithm 3 with ηt < 1=L satisfy the bound:
2ηt( t(xt+1) − t?) ≤ (1 − µη ¯ t)kxt − x¯tk2 − (1 − γηt)kxt+1 − x¯tk2
+ 2ηthzt; xt − x¯ti + ηt2
1−Lηt kztk2:
Proof By Lemma 13, we have
 t(xt+1) − t(¯ xt)−’t(xt+1) − ’t(¯ xt)
= ft;x¯t(xt+1) − ft;x¯t(¯ xt) − ft;xt(xt+1) − ft;xt(¯ xt)
≤ γkxt − x¯tkkxt+1 − x¯tk:
Hence
t(xt+1) − t? ≤ ’t(xt+1) − ’t(¯ xt) + γkxt − x¯tkkxt+1 − x¯tk:
Moreover, Young’s inequality implies
γkxt − x¯tkkxt+1 − x¯tk ≤ γ2 kxt − x¯tk2 + γ2 kxt+1 − x¯tk2:
Multiplying through by 2ηt and applying Lemma 2 completes the proof.
22Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
For simplicity, we state the main results under the assumption that the second moments
E ∆¯ 2
t and Ekztk2 are uniformly bounded; more general guarantees that take into account
weighted averages of the moments and allow for time-dependent learning rates follow from
Lemma 14 as well.
Assumption 8 (Bounded second moments) There exist constants ∆¯ ; σ > 0 such that
the following two conditions hold for all t ≥ 0:
(i) (Drift) The equilibrium drift ∆¯ t satisfies E ∆¯ 2 t ≤ ∆¯ 2.
(ii) (Noise) The gradient noise zt satisfies Ekztk2 ≤ σ2.
The following theorem establishes an expected improvement guarantee for Algorithm 3,
thereby extending Theorem 3; see Section 6.1 for the precise statement (Corollary 27) and
proof.
Theorem 15 (Expected distance) Suppose that Assumption 8 holds. Then the iterates
produced by Algorithm 3 with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L satisfy the bound:
Ekxt − x¯tk2 . (1 − µη ¯ )tkx0 − x¯0k2
| {z }
optimization
+
ησ2
µ¯
|{z}
noise
+ µη ¯∆¯ 2
| {z }
drift
:
With Theorem 15 in hand, we are led to define the following asymptotic tracking error
of Algorithm 3 corresponding to Ekxt − x¯tk2, together with the corresponding optimal step
size:
E¯ := min
η2(0;1=2L] (ησ2
µ¯
+ µη ¯∆¯ 2) and ¯ η? := min (21L; 2∆¯ 2
µσ ¯ 2 1=3):
Plugging η¯? into the definition of E¯, we see that Algorithm 3 exhibits qualitatively different
behaviors in settings corresponding to high or low drift-to-noise ratio ∆¯ =σ:
¯ E ≍
8><>:
σ2
µL ¯ + Lµ¯∆¯ 2 if ∆σ¯ ≥ q µ¯
16L3
∆¯ σ2
µ¯2 2=3 otherwise:
As before, the high drift-to-noise regime ∆¯ =σ ≥ pµ= ¯ 16L3 is uninteresting from the viewpoint
of stochastic optimization and we focus on the low drift-to-noise regime ∆¯ =σ < pµ= ¯ 16L3.
The following theorem extends Theorem 4; see Theorem 28 for the formal statement and
proof.
Theorem 16 (Time to track in expectation, informal) Suppose that Assumption 8
holds. Then there is a learning rate schedule fηtg such that Algorithm 3 produces a point xt
satisfying
Ekxt − x¯tk2 . E¯ in time t . L
µ¯
logkx0 − x¯0k2
E¯  + σ2
µ¯2E¯:
23Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Next, we present high-probability guarantees for the tracking error kxt − x¯tk2 under the
following standard light-tail assumption on the equilibrium drift and gradient noise.
Assumption 9 (Sub-Gaussian drift and noise) There exist constants ∆¯ ; σ > 0 such
that the following two conditions hold for all t ≥ 0:
(i) (Drift) The drift ∆¯ 2 t is sub-exponential conditioned on Ft with parameter ∆¯ 2:
Eexp(λ∆¯ 2 t ) j Ft ≤ exp(λ∆¯ 2) for all 0 ≤ λ ≤ ∆¯ −2:
(ii) (Noise) The noise zt is norm sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft with parameter σ=2:
Pkztk ≥ τ j Ft ≤ 2 exp(−2τ2=σ2) for all τ > 0:
Note that the first item of Assumption 9 is equivalent to asserting that the equilibrium
drift ∆¯ t is sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft, and that this condition holds trivially in the
setting of Example 3 with ∆¯ = θβ=µ¯ provided the regularizers rt ≡ r are identical for all
times t. Clearly Assumption 9 implies Assumption 8 with the same constants ∆¯ ; σ. The
following theorem shows that if Assumption 9 holds, then the expected bound on kxt − x¯tk2
derived in Theorem 15 holds with high probability.
Theorem 17 (High-probability distance tracking) Let fxtg be the iterates produced
by Algorithm 3 with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L, and suppose that Assumption 9 holds.
Then there is an absolute constant c > 0 such that for any specified t 2 N and δ 2 (0; 1), the
following estimate holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
kxt − x¯tk2 ≤ 1 − µη ¯2 tkx0 − x¯0k2 + c ησ2
µ¯
+ µη ¯∆¯ 2! logδe: (11)
Theorem 17 is an extension of Theorem 6. As a consequence of Theorem 17, we can again
implement a step decay schedule in the low drift-to-noise regime to obtain the following
efficiency estimate with high probability, thereby extending Theorem 7; see Section 6.2 for
the precise statements (Theorems 30 and 31) and proofs.
Theorem 18 (Time to track with high probability, informal) Suppose that Assumption 9 holds and that we are in the low drift-to-noise regime ∆¯ =σ < pµ= ¯ 16L3. Then
there is a learning rate schedule fηtg such that for any specified δ 2 (0; 1), Algorithm 3
produces a point xt satisfying
kxt − x¯tk2 . E¯logδe
with probability at least 1 − δ in time
t . L
µ¯
logkx0 − x¯0k2
E¯  + σ2
µ¯2E¯:
5.3 Tracking the Equilibrium Value
The results outlined so far have focused on tracking the equilibrium point x¯t, i.e., the
minimizer of t. In this section, we present results for tracking the equilibrium value t? in
the parameter regime
γ < µ=2: (12)
24Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
The regime (12) matches the one used in Theorem 7.3 of Drusvyatskiy and Xiao (2022)
to obtain function gap bounds for biased PSG along an average iterate, and we employ a
similar averaging technique to obtain our bounds.
Imposing the regime (12), we define the positive parameter
µ^ := µ − 2γ:
Our strategy is to track the equilibrium value t? along the running average x^t of the iterates
xt produced by Algorithm 3, as defined in Algorithm 4 below. In a nutshell, the results of
Section 4 extend directly to tracking the equilibrium value t?, with µ replaced by µ^ and ∆
replaced by ∆ (defined in Assumption 10 below). ¯
Algorithm 4 Averaged Decision-Dependent PSG D-PSG(x0; µ; γ; fηtg; T)
Input: initial x0 = x^0, strong convexity parameter µ, gradient drift parameter γ 2 [0; µ=2),
and step sizes fηtgT −1
t=0 ⊂ (0; 1=µ¯), where ¯ µ = µ − γ; set ^ µ = µ − 2γ
Step t = 0; : : : ; T − 1:
Select gt = reft;xt(xt)
Set xt+1 = proxηtrt(xt − ηtgt)
Set ^ xt+1 = 1 − µη ^ t
2−µηtx^t + µη ^ t
2−µηt xt+1
Return x^T
We begin with bounding the expected value E[ t(x^t) − t?]. This requires a weak form
of uncorrelatedness between the gradient noise zi and the future equilibrium point x¯t, which
we stipulate in the following analogue of Assumption 4.
Assumption 10 (Bounded second moments) The regularizers rt ≡ r are identical for
all times t and there exist constants ∆¯ ; σ > 0 such that the following two conditions hold
for all 0 ≤ i < t:
(i) (Drift) The temporal gradient drift G¯i;t satisfies E G¯2 i;t ≤ (^ µ∆¯ ji − tj)2:
(ii) (Noise) The gradient noise zi satisfies Ekzik2 ≤ σ2 and Ehzi; x¯ti = 0.
Taking into account Lemma 1, it is clear that Assumption 10 implies the earlier Assumption 8 with the same constants ∆¯ ; σ. Further, the condition on the drift holds trivially in
the setting of Example 3 with ∆¯ = θβ=µ^ provided µ > 2"β. The following theorem presents
an expected improvement guarantee for Algorithm 4, thereby extending Theorem 8; see
Corollary 34 for the precise statement and proof.
Theorem 19 (Expected function gap) Let fx^tg be the iterates produced by Algorithm 4
with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L, and suppose that Assumption 10 holds. Then the
following bound holds for all t ≥ 0:
E t(^ xt) − t? . 1 − µη ^2 t 0(x0) − 0?
| {z }
optimization
+ ησ2
|{z}
noise
+
∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2
|{z}
drift
:
25Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
With Theorem 19 in hand, we are led to define the following asymptotic tracking error
of Algorithm 4 corresponding to E[ t(x^t) − t?], together with the corresponding optimal
step size:
Gb := min
η2(0;1=2L] ησ2 + ∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 and ^ η? := min (21L; 2∆¯ 2
µσ ^ 2 1=3):
A familiar dichotomy governed by the drift-to-noise ratio ∆¯ =σ arises. We again focus on the
low drift-to-noise regime ∆¯ =σ < pµ= ^ 16L3. The following theorem extends Theorem 9; see
Theorem 35 for the formal statement.
Theorem 20 (Time to track in expectation, informal) Suppose that Assumption 10
holds. Then there is a learning rate schedule fηtg such that Algorithm 4 produces a point x^t
satisfying
E[ t(^ xt) − t?] . Gb in time t . L
µ^ log 0(x0) − 0?
Gb  + σ2
µ^Gb:
Next, we obtain high-probability analogues of Theorems 19 and 20. Naturally, such
results should rely on light-tail assumptions on the temporal gradient drift G¯i;t and the norm
of the gradient noise kzik. We state the guarantees under an assumption of sub-Gaussian
drift and noise (Assumption 11 below). In particular, we require that the gradient noise zi
is mean-zero conditioned on the σ-algebra
Fi;t := σ(Fi; x¯t)
for all 0 ≤ i < t; the property E[zi j Fi;t] = 0 would follow from independence of the gradient
noise zi and the future equilibrium point ¯ xt.
Assumption 11 (Sub-Gaussian drift and noise) The regularizers rt ≡ r are identical
for all times t and there exist constants ∆¯ ; σ > 0 such that the following two conditions hold
for all 0 ≤ i < t:
(i) (Drift) The drift G¯2 i;t is sub-exponential with parameter (^ µ∆¯ ji − tj)2:
EexpλG¯2 i;t ≤ expλ(^ µ∆¯ ji − tj)2 for all 0 ≤ λ ≤ (^ µ∆¯ ji − tj)−2:
(ii) (Noise) The noise zi is mean-zero norm sub-Gaussian conditioned on Fi;t with
parameter σ=2, i.e., E[zi j Fi;t] = 0 and
Pkzik ≥ τ j Fi;t ≤ 2 exp(−2τ2=σ2) for all τ > 0:
Clearly the chain of implications
Assumption 11 =) Assumption 10 =) Assumption 8
holds, and the condition on the drift in Assumption 11 holds trivially in the setting of
Example 3 with ∆¯ = θβ=µ^ provided µ > 2"β. The following theorem shows that if
Assumption 11 holds, then the expected bound on t(x^t) − t? derived in Theorem 19 holds
with high probability, thereby extending Theorem 10.
26Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Theorem 21 (Function gap with high probability) Let fx^tg be the iterates produced
by Algorithm 4 with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L, and suppose that Assumption 11 holds.
Then there is an absolute constant c > 0 such that for any specified t 2 N and δ 2 (0; 1), the
following estimate holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
t(^ xt) − t? ≤ c 1 − µη ^2 t 0(x0) − 0? + ησ2 + ∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 logδe: (13)
With Theorem 21 in hand, we may implement a step decay schedule as before to obtain
the following efficiency estimate, thereby extending Theorem 11; see Section 6.4 for the
precise statements (Theorems 39 and 41) and proofs.
Theorem 22 (Time to track with high probability, informal) Suppose that Assumption 11 holds and that we are in the low drift-to-noise regime ∆¯ =σ < pµ= ^ 16L3. Fix
δ 2 (0; 1). Then there is a learning rate schedule fηtg such that Algorithm 4 produces a
point x^t satisfying
t(^ xt) − t? . Gblogδe
with probability at least 1 − Kδ in time
t . L
µ^ log 0(x0) − 0?
Gb  + σ2
µ^Gb loglogδe; where K . log2 L1 · σ2µ^
∆¯ 2 1=3!:
6. Proofs of Main Results
Roadmap. In this section, we derive the results of the preceding sections under the unified
framework presented in Section 5.1; we impose the assumptions and notation of Section 5.1
henceforth. Sections 6.1 and 6.2 handle distance tracking in expectation and with high
probability, respectively; this corresponds to the results presented in Section 5.2 (entailing
those of Sections 3.1 and 3.2). Then Sections 6.3 and 6.4 handle function gap tracking in
expectation and with high probability, respectively; this corresponds to the results presented
in Section 5.3 (entailing those of Sections 4.1 and 4.2).
6.1 Tracking the Equilibrium Point: Bounds in Expectation
The proof of Theorem 15 follows a familiar pattern in stochastic optimization. We begin by
recalling Lemma 2, which gives a standard one-step improvement guarantee for the proximal
stochastic gradient method on the fixed problem min ’t.
Lemma 23 (One-step improvement) For all x 2 Rd, the iterates fxtg produced by
Algorithm 3 with ηt < 1=L satisfy the bound:
2ηt(’t(xt+1) − ’t(x)) ≤ (1 − µηt)kxt − xk2 − kxt+1 − xk2 + 2ηthzt; xt − xi + ηt2
1−Lηt kztk2:
Proof Since ft := ft;xt is L-smooth, we have
’t(xt+1) = ft(xt+1) + rt(xt+1)
≤ ft(xt) + hrft(xt); xt+1 − xti + L2 kxt+1 − xtk2 + rt(xt+1)
= ft(xt) + rt(xt+1) + hgt; xt+1 − xti + L2 kxt+1 − xtk2 + hzt; xt+1 − xti:
27Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Next, given any δt > 0, Cauchy-Schwarz and Young’s inequality yield
hzt; xt+1 − xti ≤ δ2t kztk2 + 21δt kxt+1 − xtk2:
Therefore, given any x 2 Rd, we have
’t(xt+1) ≤ ft(xt) + rt(xt+1) + hgt; xt+1 − xti + δ−1
t +L
2 kxt+1 − xtk2 + δ2t kztk2
= ft(xt) + rt(xt+1) + hgt; xt+1 − xti + 21ηt kxt+1 − xtk2
+ δ−1
t +L−η−1
t
2 kxt+1 − xtk2 + δ2t kztk2
≤ ft(xt) + rt(x) + hgt; x − xti + 21ηt kx − xtk2 − 21ηt kx − xt+1k2
+ δ−1
t +L−η−1
t
2 kxt+1 − xtk2 + δ2t kztk2;
where the last inequality holds because xt+1 = proxηtrt(xt − ηtgt) is the minimizer of the
η−1
t -strongly convex function rt + hgt; · − xti + 21ηt k · −xtk2. Now we estimate
ft(xt) + rt(x) + hgt; x − xti = ft(xt) + hrft(xt); x − xti + rt(x) + hzt; xt − xi
≤ ft(x) − µ2 kx − xtk2 + rt(x) + hzt; xt − xi
= ’t(x) − µ2 kx − xtk2 + hzt; xt − xi
using the µ-strong convexity of ft. Thus,
’t(xt+1) ≤ ’t(x) − µ2 kx − xtk2 + hzt; xt − xi + 21ηt kx − xtk2 − 21ηt kx − xt+1k2
+δ−1
t +L−η−1
t
2 kxt+1 − xtk2 + δ2t kztk2:
Finally, taking δt = ηt=(1 − Lηt) and rearranging (note that ’t(xt+1) is finite) yields
2ηt(’t(xt+1) − ’t(x)) ≤ (1 − µηt)kxt − xk2 − kxt+1 − xk2 + 2ηthzt; xt − xi + ηt2
1−Lηt kztk2;
as claimed.
It is critically important that the one-step improvement estimate in Lemma 23 holds
with respect to any reference point x. In particular, as we already showed in Section 5.2,
taking x = ¯ xt and applying Lemma 13 yields Lemma 14:
Lemma 24 (Equilibrium one-step improvement) The iterates fxtg produced by Algorithm 3 with ηt < 1=L satisfy the bound:
2ηt( t(xt+1) − t?) ≤ (1 − µη ¯ t)kxt − x¯tk2 − (1 − γηt)kxt+1 − x¯tk2
+ 2ηthzt; xt − x¯ti + ηt2
1−Lηt kztk2:
With Lemma 24 in hand, we obtain the following recursion on kxt − x¯tk2.
Lemma 25 (Distance recursion) The iterates fxtg produced by Algorithm 3 with step
size ηt < 1=L satisfy the bound:
kxt+1 − x¯t+1k2 ≤ (1 − µη ¯ t)kxt − x¯tk2 + 2ηthzt; xt − x¯ti + ηt2
1−Lηt kztk2 + 1 + µη ¯1t∆¯ 2 t :
28Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Proof First, note
kxt+1 − x¯t+1k2 = kxt+1 − x¯tk2 + kx¯t − x¯t+1k2 + 2hxt+1 − x¯t; x¯t − x¯t+1i
≤ (1 + ¯ µηt)kxt+1 − x¯tk2 + 1 + µη ¯1tkx¯t − x¯t+1k2
by Cauchy-Schwarz and Young’s inequality. Further, the µ-strong convexity of t implies
µ2
kxt+1 − x¯tk2 ≤ t(xt+1) − t?, which together with Lemma 24 implies
(1 + ¯ µηt)kxt+1 − x¯tk2 ≤ (1 − µη ¯ t)kxt − x¯tk2 + 2ηthzt; xt − x¯ti + ηt2
1−Lηt kztk2:
The result follows.
Applying Lemma 25 recursively furnishes a bound on kxt − x¯tk2. When the step size is
constant, the next proposition follows immediately.
Proposition 26 (Last-iterate progress) The iterates fxtg produced by Algorithm 3 with
constant step size η < 1=L satisfy the bound:
kxt − x¯tk2 ≤ (1 − µη ¯ )tkx0 − x¯0k2 + 2η
t−1
X i
=0
hzi; xi − x¯ii(1 − µη ¯ )t−1−i
+ η2
1−Lη
t−1
X i
=0
kzik2(1 − µη ¯ )t−1−i + 1 + µη ¯1 
t−1
X i
=0
∆¯ 2
i (1 − µη ¯ )t−1−i:
By taking expectations in Proposition 26, we obtain the following precise version of
Theorem 15.
Corollary 27 (Expected distance) Suppose that Assumption 8 holds. Then the iterates
fxtg generated by Algorithm 3 with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L satisfy the bound:
Ekxt − x¯tk2 ≤ (1 − µη ¯ )tkx0 − x¯0k2 + 2ησ2
µ¯
+ µη ¯∆¯ 2 :
With Corollary 27 in hand, we can now prove an expected efficiency estimate for the online
proximal stochastic gradient method using a step decay schedule, wherein the algorithm
is implemented in epochs with the new learning rate chosen to be the midpoint between
the current learning rate and the asymptotically optimal learning rate η¯?. The following
theorem provides a formal version of Theorem 16 (note that in the high drift-to-noise regime
∆¯ =σ ≥ pµ= ¯ 16L3, Theorem 16 holds trivially with the constant learning rate η¯? = 1=2L).
The argument is close in spirit to the justifications of the restart schemes used by Ghadimi
and Lan (2013).
Theorem 28 (Time to track in expectation) Suppose that Assumption 8 holds and
that we are in the low drift-to-noise regime ∆¯ =σ < pµ= ¯ 16L3. Set η¯? = (2∆¯ 2=µσ ¯ 2)1=3 and
E¯ = (∆¯ σ2=µ¯2)2=3. Suppose moreover that we have available a positive upper bound on the
initial squared distance D ≥ kx0 − x¯0k2. Consider running Algorithm 3 in k = 0; : : : ; K − 1
epochs, namely, set X0 = x0 and iterate the process
Xk+1 = D-PSG(Xk; ηk; Tk) for k = 0; : : : ; K − 1;
29Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
where the number of epochs is
K = 1 + &log2 L1 · σ2µ¯
∆¯ 2 1=3!’
and we set 5
η0 =
1
2L
; T0 = &2µ¯L logµLD ¯
σ2 +’ and ηk = ηk−1 + ¯ η?
2
; Tk = log(4)
µη ¯ k  8k ≥ 1:
Then the time horizon T = T0 + · · · + TK−1 satisfies
T . L
µ¯
logµLD ¯
σ2 + + σ2
µ¯2E¯ ≤
L ¯µ
logDE¯ + + σ2
µ¯2E¯
and the corresponding tracking error satisfies EkXK − X¯Kk2 . E¯, where X¯K denotes the
minimizer of T .
Proof For each index k, let tk := T0 + · · · + Tk−1 (with t0 := 0), X¯k be the minimizer of
the corresponding equilibrium function tk, and
E¯k := 2
µ¯ ηkσ2 + ∆¯ 2
µ¯η¯?2:
Then taking into account ηk ≥ η¯?, Corollary 27 directly implies
EkXk+1 − X¯k+1k2 ≤ (1 − µη ¯ k)TkEkXk − X¯kk2 + 2
µ¯ηkσ2 + ∆¯ 2
µη ¯ k2
≤ e−µη ¯ kTkEkXk − X¯kk2 + E¯k:
We will verify by induction that the estimate EkXk − X¯kk2 ≤ 2E¯k−1 holds for all indices
k ≥ 1. To see the base case, observe
EkX1 − X¯1k2 ≤ e−µη ¯ 0T0kX0 − X¯0k2 + E¯0 ≤ 2E¯0:
Now assume that the claim holds for some index k ≥ 1. We then conclude
EkXk+1 − X¯k+1k2 ≤ e−µη ¯ kTkEkXk − X¯kk2 + E¯k
≤
1 4
EkXk − X¯kk2 + E¯k
≤
E¯k
2E¯k−1 EkXk − X¯kk2 + E¯k ≤ 2E¯k;
thereby completing the induction. Hence EkXK − X¯Kk2 ≤ 2E¯K−1.
Next, observe
E¯K−1 − p3 54 ∆¯ σ2
µ¯2 2=3 = 2σ2
µ¯
(ηK−1 − η¯?) = 2σ2
µ¯
·
η0 − η¯?
2K−1 ≤ ∆¯ σ2
µ¯2 2=3 = E¯;
so
EkXK − X¯Kk2 ≤ 2(1 + p3 54) ∆¯ σ2
µ¯2 2=3 ≍ E¯:
5. We use here the notation a+ = a _ 0 = maxfa; 0g to denote the positive part of a real number a; note
that for small D, the logarithms log(¯ µLD=σ2) and log(D=E¯) may be negative.
30Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Finally, note
T . L
µ¯
logµLD ¯
σ2 + + µ1¯ KX−1
k=1
1 ηk
and
K−1
X k
=1
1 ηk
≤ 2L
K−1
X k
=1
2k ≤ 2L · 2K = 8L · 2K−2 ≤ 8 σ2µ¯
∆¯ 2 1=3 = 8σ2
µ¯
· ∆¯ σ2
µ¯2 −2=3 ≍ σ2
µ¯E¯:
This completes the proof.
6.2 Tracking the Equilibrium Point: High-Probability Guarantees
The proof of Theorem 17 is based on recursively controlling the moment generating function
of kxt − x¯tk2. Namely, Lemma 25 in the regime ηt ≤ 1=2L directly yields
kxt+1 − x¯t+1k2 ≤ (1 − µη ¯ t)kxt − x¯tk2 + 2ηthzt; vtikxt − x¯tk + 2ηt2kztk2 + µη ¯2t ∆¯ 2 t ; (14)
where we set
vt := ( xt−x¯t
kxt−x¯tk if xt 6= ¯ xt
0 otherwise:
The goal is now to control the moment generating function Eeλkxt−x¯tk2 through the
recursive inequality (14). The basic probabilistic tool to achieve this in similar settings under
bounded noise assumptions was developed by Harvey et al. (2019); the following proposition
is a slight generalization of Claim D.1 of Harvey et al. (2019) to the light-tail setting we
require.
Proposition 29 (Recursive control on MGF) Consider scalar stochastic processes
(Vt), (Dt), and (Xt) on a probability space with filtration (Ht) such that Vt is nonnegative and Ht-measurable and the inequality
Vt+1 ≤ αtVt + DtpVt + Xt + κt
holds for some deterministic constants αt 2 (−1; 1] and κt 2 R. Suppose that the moment
generating functions of Dt and Xt conditioned on Ht satisfy the following inequalities for
some deterministic constants σt; νt > 0:
• E[exp(λDt) j Ht] ≤ exp(λ2σt2=2) for all λ ≥ 0 (e.g., Dt is mean-zero sub-Gaussian
conditioned on Ht with parameter σt).
• E[exp(λXt) j Ht] ≤ exp(λνt) for all 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1=νt (e.g., Xt is nonnegative and subexponential conditioned on Ht with parameter νt).
Then the inequality
E[exp(λVt+1)] ≤ expλ(νt + κt) Eexpλ1 + αt
2 Vt
holds for all 0 ≤ λ ≤ min1−αt
2σ2
t
;
1
2νt .
31Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Proof For any index t and any scalar λ ≥ 0, the tower rule implies
E[exp(λVt+1)] ≤ EexpλαtVt + DtpVt + Xt + κt
= exp(λκt) Ehexp(λαtVt) EexpλDtpVt exp(λXt) j Hti:
H¨older’s inequality in turn yields
EexpλDtpVt exp(λXt) j Ht ≤ qEexp2λpVtDt j Ht · Eexp(2λXt) j Ht
≤ qexp(2λ2Vtσt2) exp(2λνt)
= exp(λ2σt2Vt) exp(λνt)
provided 0 ≤ λ ≤ 21νt : Thus, if 0 ≤ λ ≤ min1−αt
2σ2
t
;
1
2νt , then the following estimate holds:
Eexp(λVt+1) ≤ exp(λκt) Eexp(λαtVt) exp(λ2σt2Vt) exp(λνt)
= expλ(νt + κt) Eexp(λ(αt + λσt2)Vt)
≤ expλ(νt + κt) Eexpλ1 + αt
2 Vt:
The proof is complete.
We may now use Proposition 29 to derive the following precise version of Theorem 17.
Theorem 30 (High-probability distance tracking) Let fxtg be the iterates produced
by Algorithm 3 with constant learning rate η ≤ 1=2L, and suppose that Assumption 9 holds.
Then there exists an absolute constant 6 c > 0 such that for any specified t 2 N and δ 2 (0; 1),
the following estimate holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
kxt − x¯tk2 ≤ 1 − µη ¯2 tkx0 − x¯0k2 + 8η(cσ)2
µ¯
+ 4µη ¯∆¯ 2! logδe:
Proof Note first that under Assumption 9, there exists an absolute constant c ≥ 1 such
that kztk2 is sub-exponential conditioned on Ft with parameter cσ2 and zt is mean-zero
sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft with parameter cσ for all t (see Jin et al., 2019, Lemma 3).
Therefore hzt; vti is mean-zero sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft with parameter cσ, while ∆¯ 2 t
is sub-exponential conditioned on Ft with parameter ∆¯ 2 by Assumption 9. Thus, in light of
inequality (14), we may apply Proposition 29 with Ht = Ft, Vt = kxt −x¯tk2, Dt = 2ηthzt; vti,
Xt = 2ηt2kztk2 + 2∆¯ 2 t =µη ¯ t, αt = 1 − µη ¯ t, κt = 0, σt = 2ηtcσ, and νt = 2ηt2cσ2 + 2∆¯ 2=µη ¯ t,
yielding the estimate
Eexpλkxt+1 − x¯t+1k2 ≤ expλ2ηt2cσ2 + 2∆¯ 2
µη ¯ t  Eexpλ1 − µη ¯ t
2 kxt − x¯tk2 (15)
for all
0 ≤ λ ≤ min  µ¯
8ηt(cσ)2 ;
1
4ηt2cσ2 + 4∆¯ 2=µη ¯ t:
6. Explicitly, one can take any c ≥ 1 such that kztk2 is sub-exponential conditioned on Ft with parameter
cσ2 and zt is mean-zero sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft with parameter cσ for all t.
32Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Taking into account ηt ≡ η and iterating the recursion (15), we deduce
Eexpλkxt − x¯tk2 ≤ exp λ1 − µη ¯2 tkx0 − x¯0k2 + λ2η2cσ2 + 2∆¯ 2
µη ¯ Xt−1
i=0
1 − µη ¯2 i!
≤ exp λ 1 − µη ¯2 tkx0 − x¯0k2 + 4ηcσ2
µ¯
+ 4µη ¯∆¯ 2!!
for all
0 ≤ λ ≤ min  µ¯
8η(cσ)2 ;
1
4η2cσ2 + 4∆¯ 2=µη ¯ :
Moreover, setting
ν :=
8η(cσ)2
µ¯
+ 4µη ¯∆¯ 2
and taking into account c ≥ 1 and ¯ µη ≤ 1, we have
4ηcσ2
µ¯
+ 4µη ¯∆¯ 2 ≤ ν
and
1 ν
=
µ¯
8η(cσ)2 + 4∆¯ 2=µη ¯ 2 ≤ min  µ¯
8η(cσ)2 ;
1
4η2cσ2 + 4∆¯ 2=µη ¯ :
Hence
Ehexpλkxt − x¯tk2 − 1 − µη ¯2 tkx0 − x¯0k2i ≤ exp(λν) for all 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1=ν:
Taking λ = 1=ν and applying Markov’s inequality completes the proof.
With Theorem 30 in hand, we can now prove a high-probability efficiency estimate for
Algorithm 3 using a step decay schedule. The following theorem provides a formal version
of Theorem 18. The argument follows the same reasoning as in the proof of Theorem 28,
with Theorem 30 playing the role of Corollary 27. The proof appears in Appendix B (see
Section B.1).
Theorem 31 (Time to track with high probability) Suppose that Assumption 9 holds
and that we are in the low drift-to-noise regime ∆¯ =σ < pµ= ¯ 16L3. Set η¯? = (2∆¯ 2=µσ ¯ 2)1=3
and E¯ = (∆¯ σ2=µ¯2)2=3. Suppose moreover that we have available an upper bound on the
initial squared distance D ≥ kx0 − x¯0k2. Consider running Algorithm 3 in k = 0; : : : ; K − 1
epochs, namely, set X0 = x0 and iterate the process
Xk+1 = D-PSG(Xk; ηk; Tk) for k = 0; : : : ; K − 1;
where the number of epochs is
K = 1 + &log2 L1 · σ2µ¯
∆¯ 2 1=3!’
and we set
η0 =
1
2L
; T0 = &4µ¯L logµLD ¯
σ2 +’ and ηk = ηk−1 + ¯ η?
2
; Tk = 2 log(12)
µη ¯ k  8k ≥ 1:
33Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Then the time horizon T = T0 + · · · + TK−1 satisfies
T . L
µ¯
logµLD ¯
σ2 + + σ2
µ¯2E¯ ≤
L ¯µ
logDE¯ + + σ2
µ¯2E¯;
and for any specified δ 2 (0; 1), the corresponding tracking error satisfies
kXK − X¯Kk2 . E¯logδe
with probability at least 1 − δ, where X¯K denotes the minimizer of T .
6.3 Tracking the Equilibrium Value: Bounds in Expectation
We turn now to tracking the equilibrium value. To begin, we require a more flexible version
of Lemma 24 which holds in the static regularizer setting rt ≡ r.
Lemma 32 (Equilibrium one-step improvement) The iterates fxtg produced by Algorithm 3 with rt ≡ r and ηt < 1=L satisfy the following bound for all indices i; t 2 N and
arbitrary α > 0:
2ηi t(xi+1) − t? ≤ (1 − µη ¯ i)kxi − x¯tk2 − 1 − (γ + α)ηikxi+1 − x¯tk2
+ 2ηihzi; xi − x¯ti + ηi2
1−Lηi kzik2 + ηαi G¯2 i;t:
Proof Taking into account rt ≡ r and applying Lemma 13, we have
 t(xi+1) − t(¯ xt)−’i(xi+1) − ’i(¯ xt)
= ft;x¯t(xi+1) − ft;x¯t(¯ xt) − fi;xi(xt+1) − fi;xi(¯ xt)
≤ G¯i;t + γkxi − x¯tkkxi+1 − x¯tk:
Hence
t(xi+1) − t? ≤ ’i(xi+1) − ’i(¯ xt) + G¯i;t + γkxi − x¯tkkxi+1 − x¯tk:
Moreover, Young’s inequality implies
G¯i;t + γkxi − x¯tkkxi+1 − x¯tk ≤ γ2kxi − x¯tk2 + γ+α
2 kxi+1 − x¯tk2 + 21αG¯2 i;t:
Multiplying through by 2ηi and applying Lemma 23 completes the proof.
Turning the estimate in Lemma 32 into an efficiency guarantee for the average iterate
is essentially standard and follows for example from the averaging techniques used by
Drusvyatskiy and Xiao (2022), Ghadimi and Lan (2012), and Kulunchakov and Mairal
(2020). The resulting progress along the average iterate is summarized in the following
proposition, while the description of the key averaging lemma is placed in Appendix A.
Henceforth, we impose the regime (12): γ < µ=2.
34Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Proposition 33 (Progress along the average iterate) The iterates fx^tg produced by
Algorithm 4 with rt ≡ r and constant step size η ≤ 1=2L satisfy the bound
t(^ xt) − t? ≤ (1 − ρ^)t t(x0) − t? + µ4^ kx0 − x¯tk2 + ^ ρ
t−1
X i
=0
hzi; xi − x¯ti(1 − ρ^)t−1−i
+ ^ ρη
t−1
X i
=0
kzik2(1 − ρ^)t−1−i + µρ^^
t−1
X i
=0
G¯2
i;t(1 − ρ^)t−1−i;
where ρ^ := ^ µη=(2 − µη).
Proof Setting α = µ= ^ 2 in Lemma 32, we obtain the following recursion for all indices k ≥ 0
and t ≥ 1:
ρ k(xt) − k? ≤ (1 − c1ρ)Vt−1 − (1 + c2ρ)Vt + !t;
where ρ = 2η, c1 = µ= ¯ 2, c2 = −µ=4, Vi = kxi − x¯kk2, and !t = 2ηhzt−1; xt−1 − x¯ki +
2η2kzt−1k2 + (2η=µ^)G¯2 t−1;k. The result follows by applying Lemma 42 with h = k − k? and
then taking k = t.
Taking expectations in Proposition 33 yields the following precise version of Theorem 19.
Corollary 34 (Expected function gap) Let fx^tg be the iterates produced by Algorithm
4 with constant step size η ≤ 1=2L, set ρ^ := µη= ^ (2 − µη), and suppose that Assumption 10
holds. Then
E t(^ xt) − t? ≤ (1 − ρ^)t E t(x0) − t? + µ4^ kx0 − x¯tk2 + ησ2 + 8∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 (16)
for all t ≥ 0. Consequently, we have
E t(^ xt) − t? . (1 − ρ^)t 0(x0) − 0? + ησ2 +
∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2
for all t ≥ 0, and the following asymptotic error bound holds:
lim sup
t!1
E t(^ xt) − t? ≤ ησ2 + 8∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 :
Proof The bound (16) follows by taking expectations in Proposition 33 and noting
t−1
X i
=0
Ekzik2(1 − ρ^)t−1−i ≤ σ2
ρ^ and
t−1
X i
=0
E G¯2
i;t(1 − ρ^)t−1−i ≤ (^ µ∆) ¯ 2(2 − ρ^)
ρ^3
by Assumption 10. Next, applying Lemma 13, Lemma 1, and Young’s inequality together
with the µ-strong convexity of 0 yields
t(x0) − t? + µ4^ kx0 − x¯tk2 ≤ 3 0(x0) − 0? + 5G¯2 0;t=µ; ¯ (17)
and then taking expectations and invoking Assumption 10 gives
E t(x0) − t? + µ4^ kx0 − x¯tk2 ≤ 3 0(x0) − 0? + 5^ µ∆¯ 2t2: (18)
Further, the inequality
e−µηt= ^ 2µt ^ 2 ≤ 16=µη ^ 2 8µ; η; t > ^ 0 (19)
35Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
combines with inequality (18) to yield
(1 − ρ^)t E t(x0) − t? + µ4^kx0 − x¯tk2 ≤ 3(1 − ρ^)t 0(x0) − 0? + 80∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 ;
and the remaining assertions of the corollary follow.
We may now apply Corollary 34 to obtain a formal version of Theorem 20; the proof
closely follows that of Theorem 28 and is included in Appendix B (see Section B.2).
Theorem 35 (Time to track in expectation) Suppose that Assumption 10 holds and
that we are in the low drift-to-noise regime ∆¯ =σ < pµ= ^ 16L3. Set η^? = (2∆¯ 2=µσ ^ 2)1=3 and
Gb = µ^(∆¯ σ2=µ^2)2=3. Suppose moreover that we have available a positive upper bound on the
initial gap D ≥ 0(x0) − 0?. Consider running Algorithm 4 in k = 0; : : : ; K − 1 epochs,
namely, set X0 = x0 and iterate the process
Xk+1 = D-PSG(Xk; µ; γ; ηk; Tk) for k = 0; : : : ; K − 1;
where the number of epochs is
K = 1 + &log2 L1 · σ2µ^
∆¯ 2 1=3!’
and we set
η0 =
1
2L
; T0 = &4µ^L logLD σ2 +’ and ηk = ηk−1 + ^ η?
2
; Tk = 2 log(12)
µη ^ k  8k ≥ 1:
Then the time horizon T = T0 + · · · + TK−1 satisfies
T . L
µ^ logLD σ2 + + σ2
µ^Gb ≤
L ^µ
logDGb+ + σ2
µ^Gb
and the corresponding tracking error satisfies E T (XK) − T?  . Gb:
6.4 Tracking the Equilibrium Value: High-Probability Guarantees
In this section, we derive the high-probability analogues of the results in Section 6.3. In
light of Proposition 33, we seek upper bounds on the sums
t−1
X i
=0
hzi; xi − x¯ti(1 − ρ^)t−1−i;
t−1
X i
=0
kzik2(1 − ρ^)t−1−i;
t−1
X i
=0
G¯2
i;t(1 − ρ^)t−1−i
that hold with high probability. The last two sums can easily be estimated under boundedness
or light-tail assumptions on kzik and G¯i;t. Controlling the first sum is more challenging
because the error kxi −x¯tk may in principle grow large. In order to control this term, we will
use a remarkable generalization of Freedman’s inequality, recently proved by Harvey et al.
(2019) for the purpose of analyzing the stochastic gradient method on static nonsmooth
problems (without a regularizer).
The main idea is as follows. Fix a horizon t, assume E[zi j Fi;t] = 0 for all 0 ≤ i < t
(recall that Fi;t := σ(Fi; x¯t)), and define the martingale difference sequence
di := hzi; xi − x¯ti(1 − ρ^)t−1−i
36Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
adapted to the filtration (Fi+1;t)t−1
i=0. Roughly speaking, under mild light-tail assumptions,
the total conditional variance of the corresponding martingale Pt−1
i=0 di can be bounded above
with high probability by an affine transformation of itself, i.e., by an affine combination of
the sequence fdigt−1
i=0. In this way, the martingale is self-regulating. This is the content of
the following proposition. The proof follows from Lemma 32 and algebraic manipulation
and is placed in Appendix B (see Section B.3).
Proposition 36 (Self-regulation) The iterates fxtg produced by Algorithm 3 with rt ≡ r
and constant step size η ≤ 1=2L satisfy the following bound for all λ 2 (0; µη ¯ ]:
t−1
X i
=0
kxi − x¯tk2(1 − λ)2(t−1−i) ≤
t−2
X j
=0
0@
2η
t−1
X
i=j+1
(1 − λ)t−2−i1 Ahzj; xj − x¯ti(1 − λ)t−1−j
+ 1
λ(1 − λ)t−1kx0 − x¯tk2 + 2λη2
t−2
X j
=0
kzjk2(1 − λ)t−2−j
+ η
µλ ¯
t−2
X j
=0
G¯2
j;t(1 − λ)t−2−j:
In order to bound the self-regulating martingale Pt−1
i=0 di, we will use the generalized
Freedman inequality developed by Harvey et al. (2019), or rather a direct consequence
thereof (see Harvey et al., 2019, Lemma C.3).
Theorem 37 (Consequence of generalized Freedman) Let (Di)n i=0 and (Vi)n i=0 be
scalar stochastic processes on a probability space with filtration (Hi)n+1
i=0 satisfying
E[exp(λDi) j Hi] ≤ exp(λ2Vi=2) for all λ ≥ 0:
Suppose that Di is Hi+1-measurable with EjDij < 1 and E[Di j Hi] = 0, and that Vi is
nonnegative and Hi-measurable. Suppose moreover that there are constants α0; : : : ; αn ≥ 0,
δ 2 [0; 1], and β(δ) ≥ 0 satisfying
P (Xi=0 n Vi ≤ Xi=0 n αiDi + β(δ)) ≥ 1 − δ:
Set α := maxfα0; : : : ; αng. Then for all τ > 0, the following bound holds:
P (Xi=0 n Di ≥ τ) ≤ δ + exp− τ
4α + 8β(δ)=τ :
Combining Proposition 36 and Theorem 37 yields the following tail bound for Pt−1
i=0 di.
Proposition 38 (Noise martingale tail bound) Let fxtg be the iterates produced by
Algorithm 3 with constant step size η ≤ 1=2L, set ρ^ := µη= ^ (2 − µη), and suppose that
Assumption 11 holds. Then there is an absolute constant c > 0 such that for any specified
t 2 N, δ 2 (0; 1), and τ > 0, the following bound holds:
P (Xti=0 −1hzi; xi − x¯ti(1 − ρ^)t−1−i ≥ τ) ≤ δ + exp− τ
4α + 8βt log(3e=δ)=τ ;
37Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
where α := 3η(cσ)2=ρ^ and
βt := (1 − ρ^)t−1kx0 − x¯0k2 + ∆¯ 2t22(cσ)2
ρ^ +
2η2(cσ)4
ρ^2 +
3^ µ∆¯ 2η(cσ)2
ρ^4 :
Proof By Assumption 11, there exists an absolute constant c ≥ 1 such that kzik2 is
sub-exponential conditioned on Fi;t with parameter cσ2 and zi is mean-zero sub-Gaussian
conditioned on Fi;t with parameter cσ for all indices 0 ≤ i < t. Then for each 0 ≤ i < t, the
Fi+1;t-measurable random variable hzi; xi − x¯ti is mean-zero sub-Gaussian conditioned on
Fi;t with parameter cσkxi − x¯tk, so
Eexpλhzi; xi − x¯ti(1 − ρ^)t−1−i j Fi;t ≤ expλ2(cσ)2kxi − x¯tk2(1 − ρ^)2(t−1−i)=2 8λ 2 R;
note also that Ejhzi; xi − x¯tij < 1 by H¨older’s inequality, Assumption 8, and Corollary 27.
Now fix t ≥ 1 and observe that Proposition 36 yields the total conditional variance bound
t−1
X i
=0
(cσ)2kxi − x¯tk2(1 − ρ^)2(t−1−i) ≤
t−2
X j
=0
αjhzj; xj − x¯ti(1 − ρ^)t−1−j + Rt;
where 0 ≤ αj ≤ α for all 0 ≤ j ≤ t − 2 and
Rt := (cσ)2
ρ^ (1 − ρ^)t−1kx0 − x¯tk2 + 2η2(cσ)2
ρ^
t−2
X j
=0
kzjk2(1 − ρ^)t−2−j + η(cσ)2
µ¯ρ^
t−2
X j
=0
G¯2
j;t(1 − ρ^)t−2−j:
We claim
P Rt ≤ βt log3δe ≥ 1 − δ 8δ 2 (0; 1): (20)
To verify (20), observe first that for all n ≥ 0, the sum Pn i=0 kzik2(1−ρ^)n−i is sub-exponential
with parameter Pn i=0 cσ2(1 − ρ^)n−i ≤ (cσ)2=ρ^, so Markov’s inequality implies
P (Xi=0 n kzik2(1 − ρ^)n−i ≤ (cσ)2
ρ^ logδe) ≥ 1 − δ 8δ 2 (0; 1): (21)
Further, for all 0 ≤ n < t, it follows from Assumption 11 and Lemma 1 that kx0 −x¯tk2 is subexponential with parameter 2(kx0 − x¯0k2 + ∆¯ 2t2) and Pn i=0 G¯2 i;t(1 − ρ^)n−i is sub-exponential
with parameter
nX i
=0
(^ µ∆) ¯ 2(t − i)2(1 − ρ^)n−i = (^ µ∆) ¯ 2(1 − ρ^)n+1−t
nX i
=0
(t − i)2(1 − ρ^)t−i−1 ≤ 2(^ µ∆) ¯ 2
ρ^3(1 − ρ^)t−1−n ;
so Markov’s inequality implies
P nkx0 − x¯tk2 ≤ 2(kx0 − x¯0k2 + ∆¯ 2t2) logδeo ≥ 1 − δ 8δ 2 (0; 1) (22)
and
P (Xi=0 n G¯2 i;t(1 − ρ^)n−i ≤ 2(^ µ∆) ¯ 2
ρ^3(1 − ρ^)t−1−n logδe) ≥ 1 − δ 8δ 2 (0; 1): (23)
38Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Thus, (21){(23) and a union bound yield (20). Consequently, Theorem 37 implies that the
following bound holds for all δ 2 (0; 1) and τ > 0:
P (Xti=0 −1hzi; xi − x¯ti(1 − ρ^)t−1−i ≥ τ) ≤ δ + exp− τ
4α + 8βt log(3e=δ)=τ ;
as claimed.
We may now deduce the following precise version of Theorem 21 using the tail bound
furnished by Proposition 38.
Theorem 39 (Function gap with high probability) Let fx^tg be the iterates produced
by Algorithm 4 with constant step size η ≤ 1=2L, set ρ^ := µη= ^ (2 − µη), and suppose that
Assumption 11 holds. Then there is an absolute constant c > 0 such that for any specified
t 2 N and δ 2 (0; 1), the following estimate holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
t(^ xt) − t? ≤ (1 − ρ^)t t(x0) − t? + µ4^kx0 − x¯tk2 + η(cσ)2 + 8∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 + 9^ ρp8βtlog4δe;
where
βt := (1 − ρ^)t−1kx0 − x¯0k2 + ∆¯ 2t22(cσ)2
ρ^ +
2η2(cσ)4
ρ^2 +
3^ µ∆¯ 2η(cσ)2
ρ^4 :
Proof A quick computation shows that given any δ 2 (0; 1), we may take
τ = 5p8βt logδe
in Proposition 38 to obtain
P (Xti=0 −1hzi; xi − x¯ti(1 − ρ^)t−1−i < 5p8βt logδe) ≥ 1 − 2δ: (24)
We may now combine (21), (23), and (24) together with Proposition 33 and a union bound
to conclude that for all δ 2 (0; 1), the estimate
t(^ xt) − t? ≤ (1 − ρ^)t t(x0) − t? + µ4^kx0 − x¯tk2 + η(cσ)2 + 2^ µ∆¯ 2
ρ^2 + 5^ ρp8βtlogδe
holds with probability at least 1 − 4δ; noting ^ ρ ≥ µη= ^ 2 completes the proof.
Remark 40 To see that Theorem 39 entails Theorem 21, observe first that in the setting
of Theorem 39, upon setting C := maxfc; 1g and selecting any t 2 N, we have
ρ^p8βt ≤ 4C2q(1 − ρ^)tkx0 − x¯0k2 + ∆¯ 2t2µησ ^ 2 + ησ2 + p6p∆¯µη ^σ ;
while the AM-GM inequality implies
2q(1 − ρ^)tkx0 − x¯0k2 + ∆¯ 2t2µησ ^ 2 ≤ (1 − ρ^)tµ^kx0 − x¯0k2 + ^ µ∆¯ 2t2 + ησ2;
39Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
inequality (19) implies
(1 − ρ^)tµ^kx0 − x¯0k2 + ^ µ∆¯ 2t2 ≤ 2(1 − ρ^)t 0(x0) − 0? + 16∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 ;
and Young’s inequality implies
2∆¯ σ
pµη ^ ≤ ησ2 +
∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 :
Hence
ρ^p8βt . (1 − ρ^)t 0(x0) − 0? + ησ2 + ∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 :
Further, inequalities (17) and (19) together with Assumption 11 imply that the estimate
(1 − ρ^)t t(x0) − t? + µ4^kx0 − x¯tk2 ≤ 3(1 − ρ^)t 0(x0) − 0? + 80∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 logδe
holds with probability at least 1 − δ for all δ 2 (0; 1). On the other hand, Theorem 39 shows
that the estimate
t(^ xt) − t? ≤ (1 − ρ^)t t(x0) − t? + µ4^kx0 − x¯tk2 + η(cσ)2 + 8∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2 + 5^ ρp8βtlog4δe
holds with probability at least 1 − δ for all δ 2 (0; 1). Thus, a union bound reveals that the
estimate
t(^ xt) − t? . (1 − ρ^)t 0(x0) − 0? + ησ2 + ∆¯ 2
µη ^ 2logδe
holds with probability at least 1 − δ for all δ 2 (0; 1).
We may now apply Theorem 21 to obtain a formal version of Theorem 22; the proof is
analogous to that of Theorem 31 and appears in Appendix B (see Section B.4).
Theorem 41 (Time to track with high probability) Suppose that Assumption 11
holds and that we are in the low drift-to-noise regime ∆¯ =σ < pµ= ^ 16L3. Set
η^? = (2∆¯ 2=µσ ^ 2)1=3 and Gb = µ^(∆¯ σ2=µ^2)2=3. Suppose moreover that we have available
a positive upper bound on the initial gap D ≥ 0(x0) − 0?. Fix δ 2 (0; 1) and consider
running Algorithm 4 in k = 0; : : : ; K − 1 epochs, namely, set X0 = x0 and iterate the process
Xk+1 = D-PSG(Xk; µ; γ; ηk; Tk) for k = 0; : : : ; K − 1;
where the number of epochs is
K = 1 + &log2 L1 · σ2µ^
∆¯ 2 1=3!’
and we set
η0 =
1
2L
; T0 = &4µ^L logLD σ2 +’ and ηk = ηk−1 + ^ η?
2
; Tk = &2 log4c log(e=δ)+
µη ^ k ’
for all k ≥ 1, where c > 0 is the absolute constant furnished by the bound (13). Then the
time horizon T = T0 + · · · + TK−1 satisfies
T . L
µ^ logLD σ2 + + σ2
µ^Gb1 _ log log δe ≤ Lµ^ logDGb+ + σ2
µ^Gb 1 _ log log δe
40Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
and the corresponding tracking error satisfies
T (XK) − T? . Gblogδe
with probability at least 1 − Kδ.
7. Numerical Illustrations
We investigate the empirical behavior of our finite-time bounds on numerical examples with
synthetic data. We consider examples of a) least-squares recovery; b) sparse least-squares
recovery; c) ‘2 2-regularized logistic regression; and investigate the behavior of kxt − x? t k2 and
’t(x^t) − ’? t in each case. The main findings are that our bounds exhibit: 1) the correct
dependence on η, σ, and ∆; 2) excellent coverage in Monte-Carlo simulations. Code is
available online at https://github.com/joshuacutler/TimeDriftExperiments.
Least-squares recovery. Fix x0; x? 0 2 Rd and consider a Gaussian random walk fx? tg
given by x? t+1 = x? t + vt, where vt is drawn uniformly from the sphere of radius ∆ in Rd.
Given a fixed rank-d matrix A 2 Rn×d with minimum singular value pµ and maximum
singular value pL, we aim to recover fx? tg via the online least-squares problem
min
x2Rd
E
y∼Pt
12
kAx − yk2;
where Pt = N(Ax? t ; Σt) with covariance matrix Σt satisfying tr Σt ≤ σ2=L. This amounts to
the problem (5) with ft(x) = Ey∼Pt 1 2kAx − yk2 and rt = 0, and the minimizer and gradient
drift satisfy
krft(x) − rft+1(x)k = kA>A(x? t − x? t+1)k ≤ Lkx? t − x? t+1k = L∆
for all x 2 Rd. We implement Algorithms 1 and 2 using the sample gradient gt = AT (Axt−yt)
at step t with yt ∼ Pt; the gradient noise zt = A>(yt − Ax? t ) ∼ N(0; A>ΣtA) satisfies
Ekztk2 ≤ L tr Σt ≤ σ2.
In our simulations, we set d = 50, n = 100, and Σt = (σ2=nL)In for all t, where In
denotes the n × n identity matrix. We initialize x0 and x? 0 using standard Gaussian entries
and generate A via singular value decomposition with Haar-distributed orthogonal matrices.
In Figures 1 and 2, we use default parameter values µ = L = 1, σ = 10, ∆ = 1, and the
corresponding asymptotically optimal step size η = η?. Since ft is µ-strongly convex and
L-smooth, this puts us in the low drift/noise regime in Figure 1: ∆=σ < pµ=16L3 = 1=4.
To estimate the expected values and confidence intervals of kxt − x? tk2 and ’t(x^t) − ’? t , we
run 100 trials with horizon T = 100.
41Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
0 20 40 60 80 100
t
101
102
Ekxt − x? t k2
Guaranteed bound Asymptotic bound Empirical average 95% CI
0 20 40 60 80 100
t
101
102
E[ϕt(ˆ xt) − ϕ? t ]
Figure 1: Semilog plots of guaranteed bounds and empirical tracking errors with respect to iteration
t for least-squares recovery. Shaded regions indicate the 95% confidence intervals for
kxt − x? t k2 and ’t(x^t) − ’? t ; empirical averages and confidence intervals are computed
over 100 trials. Default parameter values: µ = L = 1, σ = 10, ∆ = 1, and η = η?.
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
101
102
103
EkxT − x? T k2
0 5 10 15 20
101
102
0 5 10 15 20
101
102
103
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
η
101
102
103
E[ϕT (ˆ xT ) − ϕ? T ]
0 5 10 15 20
σ
101
102
Guaranteed bound Empirical average 95% CI
0 5 10 15 20
∆
100
101
102
103
Figure 2: Semilog plots of guaranteed bounds and empirical tracking errors at horizon T = 100
with respect to η, σ, and ∆ for least-squares recovery. Shaded regions indicate the 95%
confidence intervals for kxT − x? T k2 and ’T (x^T ) − ’? T ; empirical averages and confidence
intervals are computed over 100 trials. Default parameter values: µ = L = 1, σ = 10,
∆ = 1, and η = η?.
42Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Sparse least-squares recovery. Next, we consider least-squares recovery constrained to
the closed ‘1-ball in Rd, which we denote by B1. We aim to recover a sequence of sparse
vectors in B1 generated as follows. Set s = blog dc, draw a vector u uniformly from the
‘1-ball in Rs, fix x? 0 = (u; 0) 2 Rd, and select ∆ 2 (0; p2]. At step t, with probability
p = (4 − 2∆2)=(4 − ∆2), we set x? t+1 = x? t + vt, where vt is selected to have the same support
as x?
t and satisfy kvtk = ∆=p2 and x? t +vt 2 B1; otherwise, with probability 1− p, we obtain
x?
t+1 from x? t by swapping precisely one nonzero coordinate with a zero coordinate. The
resulting sequence fx? t g in B1 satisfies Ekx? t − x? t+1k2 ≤ ∆2. Given a fixed rank-d matrix
A 2 Rn×d with minimum singular value pµ and maximum singular value pL, we aim to
recover fx? t g via the online constrained least-squares problem
min
x2B1
E
y∼Pt
12
kAx − yk2;
where Pt = N(Ax? t ; Σt) with covariance matrix Σt satisfying tr Σt ≤ σ2=L. This amounts to
the problem (5) with ft(x) = Ey∼Pt 12kAx − yk2 and rt = δB1 (the convex indicator of B1),
and the minimizer and gradient drift satisfy
Esupxkrft(x) − rft+1(x)k2 ≤ L2 Ekx? t − x? t+1k2 ≤ (L∆)2:
Fixing x0 drawn uniformly from B1, we implement Algorithms 1 and 2 initialized at x0 using
the sample gradient gt = AT (Axt − yt) at step t with yt ∼ Pt; hence Ekrft(xt) − gtk2 ≤ σ2.
In our simulations, we set d = 50, n = 100, and Σt = (σ2=nL)In for all t. We generate A
via singular value decomposition with Haar-distributed orthogonal matrices. In Figures 3
and 4, we use default parameter values µ = L = 1, σ = 1=2, ∆ = 1=20, and the corresponding
asymptotically optimal step size η = η?. Since ft is µ-strongly convex and L-smooth, this
puts us in the low drift/noise regime in Figure 3: ∆=σ < pµ=16L3 = 1=4. To estimate the
expected values and confidence intervals of kxt − x? t k2 and ’t(x^t) − ’? t , we run 100 trials
with horizon T = 100.
0 20 40 60 80 100
t
10−3
10−2
10−1
Ekxt − x? t k2
Guaranteed bound Asymptotic bound Empirical average 95% CI
0 20 40 60 80 100
t
10−2
10−1
E[ϕt(ˆ xt) − ϕ? t ]
Figure 3: Semilog plots of guaranteed bounds and empirical tracking errors with respect to iteration
t for sparse least-squares recovery. Shaded regions indicate the 95% confidence intervals
for kxt − x? t k2 and ’t(x^t) − ’? t ; empirical averages and confidence intervals are computed
over 100 trials. Default parameter values: µ = L = 1, σ = 1=2, ∆ = 1=20, and η = η?.
43Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
EkxT − x? T k2
0 1 2 3 4 5
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
η
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
E[ϕT (ˆ xT ) − ϕ? T ]
0 1 2 3 4 5
σ
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
Guaranteed bound Empirical average 95% CI
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
∆
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Figure 4: Semilog plots of guaranteed bounds and empirical tracking errors at horizon T = 100 with
respect to η, σ, and ∆ for sparse least-squares recovery. Shaded regions indicate the 95%
confidence intervals for kxT − x? T k2 and ’T (x^T ) − ’? T ; empirical averages and confidence
intervals are computed over 100 trials. Default parameter values: µ = L = 1, σ = 1=2,
∆ = 1=20, and η = η?.
‘2
2-regularized logistic regression. Finally, we consider the time-varying ‘2 2-regularized
logistic regression problem
min
x2Rd
1 n
nX i
=1
log1 + exphai; xi − hAx; bti! + µ2 kxk2;
where the matrix A 2 Rn×d has fixed rows a1; : : : ; an 2 Rd, fbtg is a random sequence of label
vectors in f0; 1gn such that bt and bt+1 differ in precisely one coordinate for each t, and µ > 0.
This amounts to the problem (5) with ft(x) = n1 (Pn i=1 log(1 + exphai; xi) − hAx; bti)+ µ2 kxk2
and rt = 0; setting L = 41nkAk2 op + µ, it follows that ft is µ-strongly convex and Lsmooth. Letting fx? t g denote the corresponding sequence of minimizers and setting ∆ =
1
µn
maxi=1;:::;n kaik, it follows that the minimizer and gradient drift satisfy
µkx? t − x? t+1k ≤ sup
x
krft(x) − rft+1(x)k ≤ µ∆:
We implement Algorithms 1 and 2 using the random summand sample gradient
gt = 1 + exp exphahka; x k; x ti ti − bk t ak + µxt
44Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
at step t, where k ∼ Uniff1; : : : ; ng and bk t denotes the kth coordinate of bt; the gradient
noise satisfies Ekrft(xt) − gtk2 ≤ σ2, where
σ2 = 1
n2
0@(
n − 2)
nX i
=1
kaik2 +
nX
i;j=1
kaikkajk
1A
≤ 2 max
i=1;:::;n
kaik2:
In our simulations, we set d = 20 and n = 200, fix standard Gaussian vectors x0 2 Rd and
a1; : : : ; an 2 Rd, fix b0 drawn uniformly from f0; 1gn, and generate bt+1 from bt by flipping
a single coordinate selected uniformly at random. In Figure 5, we use default parameter
values µ = 1 and the corresponding asymptotically optimal step size η = η?. In Figure 6,
we illustrate the dependence of tracking error on the regularization parameter µ; here, the
asymptotically optimal step size η? is used (which itself depends on µ). In Figure 7, we use
the default parameter value µ = 1. To estimate the expected values and confidence intervals
of kxt − x? tk2 and ’t(x^t) − ’? t , we run 100 trials with horizon T = 600. The results confirm
our bounds and show that they capture the correct dependence on µ and η. In particular,
Figure 7 illustrates that η? is close to empirically optimal.
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
t
10−1
100
101
Ekxt − x? t k2
Guaranteed bound Asymptotic bound Empirical average 95% CI
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
t
10−2
10−1
100
101
E[ϕt(ˆ xt) − ϕ? t ]
Figure 5: Semilog plots of guaranteed bounds and empirical tracking errors with respect to iteration
t for ‘2
2-regularized logistic regression. Shaded regions indicate the 95% confidence intervals
for kxt − x? t k2 and ’t(x^t) − ’? t ; empirical averages and confidence intervals are computed
over 100 trials. Default parameter values: µ = 1 and η = η?.
45Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
0 5 10 15 20
µ
10−3
10−1
101
103
EkxT − x? T k2
Guaranteed bound Empirical average 95% CI
0 5 10 15 20
µ
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
E[ϕT (ˆ xT ) − ϕ? T ]
Figure 6: Semilog plots of guaranteed bounds and empirical tracking errors at horizon T = 600 with
respect to the strong convexity parameter µ for ‘2 2-regularized logistic regression. Shaded
regions indicate the 95% confidence intervals for kxT − x? T k2 and ’T (x^T ) − ’? T ; empirical
averages and confidence intervals are computed over 100 trials, using the asymptotically
optimal step size η? (which itself depends on µ).
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
η
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
EkxT − x? T k2
Guaranteed bound Asymptotically optimal step size Empirical average 95% CI
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
η
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
E[ϕT (ˆ xT ) − ϕ? T ]
Figure 7: Semilog plots of guaranteed bounds and empirical tracking errors at horizon T = 600
with respect to the step size η for ‘2 2-regularized logistic regression. Shaded regions
indicate the 95% confidence intervals for kxT − x? T k2 and ’T (x^T ) − ’? T ; empirical averages
and confidence intervals are computed over 100 trials. Default parameter value: µ = 1.
Observe that η? is close to empirically optimal.
46Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF DMS-2023166, DMS-2134012, DMS-1651851, DMS-2133244,
CCF-2019844, and CIFAR LMB. Part of this work was done while Z. Harchaoui was visiting
the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
Appendix A. Averaging Lemma
We will use a variation of the averaging strategy used by Ghadimi and Lan (2012); our
approach here follows Drusvyatskiy and Xiao (2022, Section A) and Kulunchakov and Mairal
(2020, Sections A.2 and A.3). To begin, consider a convex function h: Rd ! R [ f1g and
let fxtgt≥0 be a sequence of vectors in Rd. Suppose that there are constants c1; c2 2 R, a
sequence of nonnegative weights fρtgt≥1, and scalar sequences fVtgt≥0 and f!tgt≥1 satisfying
the recursion
ρth(xt) ≤ (1 − c1ρt)Vt−1 − (1 + c2ρt)Vt + !t (25)
for all t ≥ 1. The goal is to bound the function value h(x^t) evaluated along an \average
iterate" ^ xt.
Suppose that the relations c1 + c2 > 0, 1 − c1ρt > 0, and 1 + c2ρt > 0 hold for all t ≥ 1.
Define the augmented weights and products
ρ^t = (c1 + c2)ρt
1 + c2ρt
and Γ^t =
tY i
=1
(1 − ρ^i)
for each t ≥ 1, and set Γ^0 = 1. A straightforward induction yields the relation
1 +
tX i
=1
ρ^i
Γ^i =
1 ^Γt
: (26)
Now set ^ x0 = x0 and recursively define the average iterates
x^t = (1 − ρ^t)^ xt−1 + ^ ρtxt
for all t ≥ 1. Unrolling this recursion, we may equivalently write
x^t = Γ^t x0 +
tX i
=1
ρ^i
Γ^i xi!: (27)
The following lemma provides the key estimate we will need.
Lemma 42 (Averaging) The estimate holds for all t ≥ 0:
h(^ xt)
c1 + c2
+ Vt ≤ Γ^t h(x0)
c1 + c2
+ V0 +
tX i
=1
!i
Γ^i(1 + c2ρi)!:
Proof Observe that (27) expresses x^t as a convex combination of x0; : : : ; xt by virtue of
(26). Therefore, by the convexity of h, we may apply Jensen’s inequality to obtain
h(^ xt) ≤ Γ^t h(x0) +
tX i
=1
ρ^i
Γ^i h(xi)!: (28)
47Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
On the other hand, for each i ≥ 1, we may divide the recursion (25) by Γ^i(1+c2ρi) to obtain
ρ^i
(c1 + c2)Γ^i h(xi) ≤ Vi−1
Γ^i−1 −
Vi ^Γi
+
!i
Γ^i(1 + c2ρi);
which telescopes to yield
1
c1 + c2
tX i
=1
ρ^i
Γ^i h(xi) ≤ V0 − Vt
Γ^t +
tX i
=1
!i
Γ^i(1 + c2ρi):
Multiplying this inequality by Γ^t and applying (28) yields
h(^ xt)
c1 + c2
≤ Γ^t h(x0)
c1 + c2
+ V0 − Vt
Γ^t +
tX i
=1
!i
Γ^i(1 + c2ρi)!;
as claimed.
Appendix B. Additional Proofs
B.1 Proof of Theorem 31
For each index k, let tk := T0 + · · · + Tk−1 (with t0 := 0), X¯k be the minimizer of the
corresponding function tk, and
E¯k := c ηkσ2
µ¯
+ µ¯∆¯η¯?2!;
where c ≥ 1 is an absolute constant satisfying the bound (11) in Theorem 17. Taking into
account ηk ≥ η¯? and our selection of c, Theorem 17 implies that for any specified index k
and δ 2 (0; 1), the following estimate holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
kXk+1 − X¯k+1k2 ≤ 1 − µη ¯ k
2 TkkXk − X¯kk2 + c ηkσ2
µ¯
+ µη ¯∆¯k 2!logδe
≤ e−µη ¯ kTk=2kXk − X¯kk2 + E¯k logδe:
We will verify by induction that for each index k ≥ 1, the estimate kXk − X¯kk2 ≤
3E¯k−1 log(e=δ) holds with probability at least 1 − δ for all δ 2 (0; 1). To see the base case,
observe that the estimate
kX1 − X¯1k2 ≤ e−µη ¯ 0T0=2kX0 − X¯0k2 + E¯0 logδe ≤ 3E¯0 logδe
holds with probability at least 1 − δ for all δ 2 (0; 1). Now assume that the claim holds for
some index k ≥ 1, and let δ 2 (0; 1); then kXk − X¯kk2 ≤ 3E¯k−1 log(2e=δ) with probability
48Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
at least 1 − δ=2. Thus, since we also have
kXk+1 − X¯k+1k2 ≤ e−µη ¯ kTk=2kXk − X¯kk2 + E¯k log2δe
≤
1
12
kXk − X¯kk2 + E¯k log2δe
≤
E¯k
6E¯k−1 kXk − X¯kk2 + E¯k log2δe
with probability at least 1 − δ=2, a union bound reveals
kXk+1 − X¯k+1k2 ≤ 3
2
E¯k log2δe ≤ 3E¯k logδe
with probability at least 1 − δ, thereby completing the induction. Hence, upon fixing
δ 2 (0; 1), we have kXK − X¯Kk2 ≤ 3E¯K−1 log(e=δ) with probability at least 1 − δ.
Next, observe
2 c
E¯K−1 − p3 54 ∆¯ σ2
µ¯2 2=3 = 2σ2
µ¯
(ηK−1 − η¯?) = 2σ2
µ¯
·
η0 − η¯?
2K−1 ≤ ∆¯ σ2
µ¯2 2=3 = E¯;
so
kXK − X¯Kk2 ≤ 3c
2
1 + p3 54E¯logδe ≍ E¯logδe
with probability at least 1 − δ. Finally, note
T . L
µ¯
logµLD ¯
σ2 + + µ1¯ KX−1
k=1
1 ηk
and
K−1
X k
=1
1 ηk
≤ 2L
K−1
X k
=1
2k ≤ 2L · 2K = 8L · 2K−2 ≤ 8 σ2µ¯
∆¯ 2 1=3 = 8σ2
µ¯
· ∆¯ σ2
µ¯2 −2=3 ≍ σ2
µ¯E¯:
This completes the proof.
B.2 Proof of Theorem 35
For each index k, let tk := T0 + · · · + Tk−1 (with t0 := 0) and Gbk := ηkσ2 + 8∆¯ 2=µ^η^?2. Then
taking into account ηk ≥ η^?, Corollary 34 and inequality (17) directly imply
E tk+1(Xk+1) − t?k+1 ≤ 1 − µη ^ k
2 TkE3 tk(Xk) − t?k + 5^ µ∆¯ 2Tk2 + ηkσ2 + 8∆¯ 2
µη ^ k2
≤ 3e−µη ^ kTk=2E tk(Xk) − t?k + 5e−µη ^ kTk=2µ^∆¯ 2Tk2 + Gbk:
We will verify by induction that the estimate E tk(Xk) − t?k ≤ 11Gbk−1 holds for all
indices k ≥ 1. To see the base case, observe that inequality (19) facilitates the estimation
E t1(X1) − t?1 ≤ 3e−µη ^ 0T0=2 0(x0) − 0? + 5e−µη ^ 0T0=2µ^∆¯ 2T02 + Gb0 ≤ 11Gb0:
49Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Now assume that the claim holds for some index k ≥ 1. We then conclude
E tk+1(Xk+1) − t?k+1 ≤ 3e−µη ^ kTk=2E tk(Xk) − t?k + 5e−µη ^ kTk=2µ^∆¯ 2Tk2 + Gbk
≤
1 4
E tk(Xk) − t?k + 13∆¯ 2
µη ^ k2 + Gbk
≤
Gbk
2Gbk−1 E tk(Xk) − t?k + 13∆¯ 2
µη ^ k2 + Gbk ≤ 11Gbk;
thereby completing the induction. Hence E T (XK) − T?  ≤ 11GbK−1.
Next, observe
GbK−1 − p3 250 · µ^∆¯ σ2
µ^2 2=3 = σ2(ηK−1 − η^?) = σ2 · η0 − η^?
2K−1 ≤
^µ 2
∆¯ σ2
µ^2 2=3 = 12Gb;
so
E T (XK) − T?  ≤ 111 2 + p3 250 · µ^∆¯ σ2
µ^2 2=3 ≍ Gb:
Finally, note
T . L
µ^ log LD σ2 + + µ1^ KX−1
k=1
1 ηk
and
K−1
X k
=1
1 ηk
≤ 2L
K−1
X k
=1
2k ≤ 2L · 2K = 8L · 2K−2 ≤ 8σ2µ^
∆¯ 2 1=3 = 8σ2 · µ^−1∆¯ σ2
µ^2 −2=3 ≍ σGb2 :
This completes the proof.
B.3 Proof of Proposition 36
Fix t ≥ 1. Given i ≥ 1 and α > 0, the µ-strong convexity of t and Lemma 32 imply
µηkxi − x¯tk2 ≤ 2η t(xi) − t? ≤ (1 − µη ¯ )kxi−1 − x¯tk2 − 1 − (γ + α)ηkxi − x¯tk2
+ 2ηhzi−1; xi−1 − x¯ti + 2η2kzi−1k2 + αη G¯2 i−1;t;
hence
1 + (¯ µ − α)ηkxi − x¯tk2 ≤ (1 − µη ¯ )kxi−1 − x¯tk2 + 2ηhzi−1; xi−1 − x¯ti
+ 2η2kzi−1k2 + αη G¯2 i−1;t:
Taking α = ¯ µ, we obtain
kxi − x¯tk2 ≤ (1 − µη ¯ )kxi−1 − x¯tk2 + 2ηhzi−1; xi−1 − x¯ti + 2η2kzi−1k2 + µη¯G¯2 i−1;t:
Thus, given any λ 2 (0; µη ¯ ] and proceeding by induction, we conclude that the following
estimate holds for all i ≥ 1:
kxi − x¯tk2 ≤ (1 − λ)ikx0 − x¯tk2 + 2η
i−1
X j
=0
hzj; xj − x¯ti(1 − λ)i−1−j
+ 2η2
i−1
X j
=0
kzjk2(1 − λ)i−1−j + µη¯
i−1
X j
=0
G¯2
j;t(1 − λ)i−1−j:
50Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
Therefore
t−1
X i
=0
kxi − x¯tk2(1 − λ)2(t−1−i)
≤ kx0 − x¯tk2
t−1
X i
=0
(1 − λ)2(t−1)−i + 2η
t−1
X i
=1
i−1
X j
=0
hzj; xj − x¯ti(1 − λ)2t−3−j−i
+ 2η2
t−1
X i
=1
i−1
X j
=0
kzjk2(1 − λ)2t−3−j−i + µη¯
t−1
X i
=1
i−1
X j
=0
G¯2
j;t(1 − λ)2t−3−j−i:
Next, we compute
t−1
X i
=0
(1 − λ)2(t−1)−i = (1 − λ)t−1
t−1
X i
=0
(1 − λ)t−1−i < λ1(1 − λ)t−1
and observe that for any scalar sequence fajgt−2
j=0, we have
t−1
X i
=1
i−1
X j
=0
aj(1 − λ)2t−3−j−i =
t−2
X j
=0
0@
t−1
X
i=j+1
(1 − λ)t−2−i1 Aaj(1 − λ)t−1−j:
Further, if aj ≥ 0 for all j = 0; : : : ; t − 2, then we have
t−1
X i
=1
i−1
X j
=0
aj(1 − λ)2t−3−j−i =
t−2
X j
=0
0@
t−1
X
i=j+1
(1 − λ)t−1−i1 Aaj(1 − λ)t−2−j
≤ λ1
t−2
X j
=0
aj(1 − λ)t−2−j:
Hence the following estimation holds:
t−1
X i
=0
kxi − x¯tk2(1 − λ)2(t−1−i) ≤
t−2
X j
=0
0@
2η
t−1
X
i=j+1
(1 − λ)t−2−i1 Ahzj; xj − x¯ti(1 − λ)t−1−j
+ 1
λ(1 − λ)t−1kx0 − x¯tk2 + 2λη2
t−2
X j
=0
kzjk2(1 − λ)t−2−j
+ η
µλ ¯
t−2
X j
=0
G¯2
j;t(1 − λ)t−2−j:
This completes the proof.
B.4 Proof of Theorem 41
For each index k, let tk := T0 + · · · + Tk−1 (with t0 := 0) and Gbk := ηkσ2 + ∆¯ 2=µ^η^?2. Then
taking into account ηk ≥ η^? and our selection of the absolute constant c > 0 via (13), it
51Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
follows that for any specified index k, the estimate
tk+1(Xk+1) − t?k+1 ≤ c 1 − µη ^ k
2 Tk tk(Xk) − t?k + ηkσ2 + ∆¯ 2
µη ^ k2 logδe
≤ c e−µη ^ kTk=2 tk(Xk) − t?k + Gbk logδe
holds with probability at least 1 − δ.
We will verify by induction that for each index k ≥ 1, the estimate
tk(Xk) − t?k ≤ 3c · Gbk−1 logδe
holds with probability at least 1 − kδ. To see the base case, observe that the estimate
t1(X1) − t?1 ≤ c e−µη ^ 0T0=2 0(x0) − 0? + Gb0 logδe ≤ 3c · Gb0 logδe
holds with probability at least 1 − δ. Now assume that the claim holds for some index k ≥ 1.
Then because we also have
tk+1(Xk+1) − t?k+1 ≤ c e−µη ^ kTk=2 tk(Xk) − t?k + Gbk logδe
≤ c  1
4c log(e=δ)
 tk(Xk) − t?k + Gbk logδe
≤ c
Gbk
2c · Gbk−1 log(e=δ)
 tk(Xk) − t?k + Gbk! logδe
with probability at least 1 − δ, a union bound reveals that the estimate
tk+1(Xk+1) − t?k+1 ≤ 3c · Gbk logδe
holds with probability at least 1 − (k + 1)δ, thereby completing the induction. In particular,
T (XK) − T? ≤ 3c · GbK−1 log(e=δ) with probability at least 1 − Kδ.
Next, observe
GbK−1 − q3 27 4 · µ^ ∆¯ σ2
µ^2 2=3 = σ2(ηK−1 − η^?) = σ2 · η0 − η^?
2K−1 ≤
^µ 2
∆¯ σ2
µ^2 2=3 = 12Gb;
so
T (XK) − T? ≤ 3c 12 + q3 27 4  · µ^ ∆¯ σ2
µ^2 2=3 log δe ≍ Gblogδe
with probability at least 1 − Kδ. Finally, note
T . L
µ^ log LD σ2 + + 1 _ log log δe µ1^ KX−1
k=1
1 ηk
and
K−1
X k
=1
1 ηk
≤ 2L
K−1
X k
=1
2k ≤ 2L · 2K = 8L · 2K−2 ≤ 8 σ2µ^
∆¯ 2 1=3 = 8σ2 · µ^−1 ∆¯ σ2
µ^2 −2=3 ≍ σGb2 :
This completes the proof.
52Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
References
Alekh Agarwal, Olivier Chapelle, Miroslav Dud´ık, and John Langford. A reliable effective
terascale linear learning system. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):1111{1133,
2014.
Francis Bach and Eric Moulines. Non-asymptotic analysis of stochastic approximation
algorithms for machine learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 24, pages 451{459. Curran Associates, Inc., 2011.
Peter L. Bartlett, Varsha Dani, Thomas P. Hayes, Sham M. Kakade, Alexander Rakhlin,
and Ambuj Tewari. High-probability regret bounds for bandit online linear optimization.
In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Learning Theory. Omnipress, 2008.
Yahav Bechavod, Katrina Ligett, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Juba Ziani. Gaming helps! Learning
from strategic interactions in natural dynamics. In The 24th International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 130 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, pages 1234{1242. PMLR, 2021.
Albert Benveniste, Michel M´etivier, and Pierre Priouret. Adaptive Algorithms and Stochastic
Approximations. Springer, 1990.
Omar Besbes, Yonatan Gur, and Assaf Zeevi. Non-stationary stochastic optimization.
Operations Research, 63(5):1227{1244, 2015.
L´eon Bottou. Stochastic learning. In Advanced Lectures on Machine Learning: ML Summer
Schools 2003, volume 3176 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 146{168.
Springer, 2003.
L´eon Bottou. Stochastic gradient descent tricks. In Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade,
volume 7700 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 421{436. Springer, 2012.
L´eon Bottou and Olivier Bousquet. The tradeoffs of large scale learning. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 20, pages 161{168. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2007.
Michael Br¨uckner, Christian Kanzow, and Tobias Scheffer. Static prediction games for
adversarial learning problems. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):2617{2654,
2012.
Joshua Cutler, Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy, and Zaid Harchaoui. Stochastic optimization under
time drift: iterate averaging, step decay, and high-probability guarantees. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Nilesh N. Dalvi, Pedro M. Domingos, Mausam, Sumit K. Sanghai, and Deepak Verma. Adversarial classification. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 99{108. ACM, 2004.
Amit Daniely, Alon Gonen, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Strongly adaptive online learning. In
Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1405{1411.
JMLR, 2015.
53Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy and Lin Xiao. Stochastic optimization with decision-dependent
distributions. Mathematics of Operations Research, 2022.
V´aclav Dupaˇc. A dynamic stochastic approximation method. The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 36(6):1695{1702, 1965.
S. Fujita and T. Fukao. Convergence conditions of dynamic stochastic approximation method
for nonlinear stochastic discrete-time dynamic systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, 17(5):715{717, 1972.
A. A. Gaivoronskii. Nonstationary stochastic programming problems. Cybernetics, 14(4):
575{579, 1978.
Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Optimal stochastic approximation algorithms for strongly
convex stochastic composite optimization i: A generic algorithmic framework. SIAM
Journal on Optimization, 22(4):1469{1492, 2012.
Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Optimal stochastic approximation algorithms for strongly
convex stochastic composite optimization, ii: Shrinking procedures and optimal algorithms.
SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(4):2061{2089, 2013.
Lei Guo and Lennart Ljung. Exponential stability of general tracking algorithms. IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, 40(8):1376{1387, 1995.
Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. Strategic
classification. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical
Computer Science, pages 111{122. ACM, 2016.
Nicholas J. A. Harvey, Christopher Liaw, Yaniv Plan, and Sikander Randhawa. Tight analyses
for non-smooth stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 32nd Conference on
Learning Theory, volume 99 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1579{1613.
PMLR, 2019.
Elad Hazan and Satyen Kale. Beyond the regret minimization barrier: Optimal algorithms
for stochastic strongly-convex optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):
2489{2512, 2014.
Elad Hazan and C. Seshadhri. Efficient learning algorithms for changing environments. In
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 393{400.
ACM, 2009.
Ali Jadbabaie, Alexander Rakhlin, Shahin Shahrampour, and Karthik Sridharan. Online
optimization: Competing with dynamic comparators. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 38, pages 398{406.
PMLR, 2015.
Chi Jin, Praneeth Netrapalli, Rong Ge, Sham M. Kakade, and Michael I. Jordan. A short note
on concentration inequalities for random vectors with subgaussian norm. arXiv:1902.03736,
2019.
54Stochastic Optimization under Distributional Drift
L. V. Kantorovich and G. Sh. Rubinshte˘ın. On a space of completely additive functions.
Vestnik Leningradskogo Universiteta. Matematika, Mekhanika, Astronomiya, 13(2):52{59,
1958.
Andrei Kulunchakov and Julien Mairal. Estimate sequences for stochastic composite
optimization: Variance reduction, acceleration, and robustness to noise. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 21(155):1{52, 2020.
Harold J. Kushner and Gang George Yin. Stochastic Approximation Algorithms and
Applications, volume 35 of Applications of Mathematics. Springer, 1997.
Guanghui Lan. An optimal method for stochastic composite optimization. Mathematical
Programming, 133(1):365{397, 2012.
Hunter Lang, Lin Xiao, and Pengchuan Zhang. Using statistics to automate stochastic
optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, pages
9536{9546. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Liam Madden, Stephen Becker, and Emiliano Dall’Anese. Bounds for the tracking error of
first-order online optimization methods. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications,
189(2):437{457, 2021.
Celestine Mendler-D¨unner, Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, and Moritz Hardt. Stochastic
optimization for performative prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 33, pages 4929{4939. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Aryan Mokhtari, Shahin Shahrampour, Ali Jadbabaie, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Online
optimization in dynamic environments: Improved regret rates for strongly convex problems.
In 55th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pages 7195{7201. IEEE, 2016.
Arkadi Nemirovski, Anatoli Juditsky, Guanghui Lan, and Alexander Shapiro. Robust stochastic approximation approach to stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization,
19(4):1574{1609, 2009.
Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-D¨unner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative
prediction. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 7599{7609. PMLR, 2020.
Alexander Rakhlin, Ohad Shamir, and Karthik Sridharan. Making gradient descent optimal
for strongly convex stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the 29th International
Conference on Machine Learning. Omnipress, 2012.
David Ruppert. A new dynamic stochastic approximation procedure. The Annals of
Statistics, 7(6):1179{1195, 1979.
Ali H. Sayed. Fundamentals of Adaptive Filtering. John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
Suvrit Sra, Sebastian Nowozin, and Stephen J. Wright. Optimization for Machine Learning.
The MIT Press, 2011.
55Cutler, Drusvyatskiy, Harchaoui
Nati Srebro, Karthik Sridharan, and Ambuj Tewari. On the universality of online mirror
descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 24, pages 2645{
2653. Curran Associates, Inc., 2011.
Ya. Z. Tsypkin and Z. J. Nikolic. Adaptation and Learning in Automatic Systems. Elsevier
Science, 1971.
Ya. Z. Tsypkin and B. T. Polyak. Optimal recurrent algorithms for identification of
nonstationary plants. Computers and Electrical Engineering, 18(5):365{371, 1992.
Katsuji Uosaki. Some generalizations of dynamic stochastic approximation processes. The
Annals of Statistics, 2(5):1042{1048, 1974.
Roman Vershynin. High-Dimensional Probability: An Introduction with Applications in
Data Science, volume 47 of Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics.
Cambridge University Press, 2018.
Craig Wilson, Venugopal V. Veeravalli, and Angelia Nedi´c. Adaptive sequential stochastic
optimization. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 64(2):496{509, 2019.
Killian Wood, Gianluca Bianchin, and Emiliano Dall’Anese. Online projected gradient
descent for stochastic optimization with decision-dependent distributions. IEEE Control
Systems Letters, 6:1646{1651, 2022.
Lijun Zhang, Shiyin Lu, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Adaptive online learning in dynamic environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, pages
1330{1340. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Peng Zhao and Lijun Zhang. Improved analysis for dynamic regret of strongly convex
and smooth functions. In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Conference on Learning for
Dynamics and Control, volume 144 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
48{59. PMLR, 2021.
Peng Zhao, Yu-Jie Zhang, Lijun Zhang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Dynamic regret of convex and
smooth functions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
pages 12510{12520. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Martin Zinkevich. Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent.
In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 928{936.
AAAI Press, 2003.
56