3. DWM: An Ensemble Method for Concept Drift
Dynamic weighted majority maintains a weighted pool of experts or base learners. It adds and
removes experts based on the global algorithm’s performance. If the global algorithm makes a
mistake, then DWM adds an expert. If an expert makes a mistake, then DWM reduces its weight.
If, in spite of multiple training episodes, an expert performs poorly, as indicated by a sufficiently
low weight, then DWM removes it from the ensemble. This method is general, and in principle, one
could use any online learning algorithm as a base learner. One could also use different types of base
learners, although one would also have to implement control policies to determine what base learner
to add.
The formal algorithm for DWM appears in Figure 1. The algorithm maintains a set of m experts,
E, each with a weight, wi for i = 1,...,m. Input to the algorithm is n training examples, each
consisting of a feature vector and a class label. The parameters also include the number of classes
(c) and β, a multiplicative factor that DWM uses to decrease an expert’s weight when it predicts
incorrectly. A typical value for β is 0.5. The parameter θ is a threshold for removing poorly
performing experts. If an expert’s weight falls below this threshold, then DWM removes it from the
ensemble. Finally, the parameter p determines how often DWM creates and removes experts. We
found this parameter useful and necessary for large or noisy problems, which we discuss further in
Section 4.2. In the following discussion, we assume p = 1.
DWM begins by creating an ensemble containing a single learner with a weight of one (lines 1–3
of Figure 1). Initially, this learner could predict a default class, or it could predict using previous
experience, background knowledge, or both. DWM then takes a single example (or perhaps a set of
examples) from the stream and presents it to the single learner to classify (line 7). If the learner’s
prediction is wrong (line 8), then DWM decreases the learner’s weight by multiplying it by β (line 9).
Since there is one expert in the ensemble, its prediction is DWM’s global prediction (lines 12 and
24). If DWM’s global prediction is incorrect (line 16), then it creates a new learner with a weight of
one (lines 17–19). DWM then trains the experts in the ensemble on the new example (line 23). After
training, DWM outputs its global prediction (line 24).
When there are multiple learners, DWM obtains a classification from each member of the ensemble (lines 6 and 7). If one’s prediction is incorrect, then DWM decreases its weight (lines 8 and 9).
Regardless of the correctness of the prediction, DWM uses each learner’s prediction and its weight
to compute a weighted sum for each class (line 10). The class with the most weight is set as the
global prediction (line 12).
Since DWM always decreases the weights of experts, it normalizes the weights by scaling them
uniformly so that, after the transformation, the maximum weight is one (line 14). This prevents
newly added experts from dominating predictions. DWM also removes poorly performing experts
by removing those with a weight less than the threshold θ (line 15), although it will not remove the
2763
KOLTER AND MALOOF
Dynamic-Weighted-Majority ( {~x, y}
1
n
, c,β,θ, p )
{~x, y}
1
n
: training data, feature vector and class label
c ∈ N
∗
: number of classes, c ≥ 2
β: factor for decreasing weights, 0 ≤ β < 1
θ: threshold for deleting experts
p: period between expert removal, creation, and weight update
{e,w}
1
m: set of experts and their weights
Λ,λ ∈ {1,..., c}: global and local predictions
~σ ∈ R
c
: sum of weighted predictions for each class
1. m ← 1
2. em ← Create-New-Expert()
3. wm ← 1
4. for i ← 1,...,n // Loop over examples
5. ~σ ← 0
6. for j ← 1,...,m // Loop over experts
7. λ ← Classify(e j
,~xi)
8. if (λ 6= yi and i mod p = 0)
9. wj ← βwj
10. σλ ← σλ +wj
11. end;
12. Λ ← argmaxj σj
13. if (i mod p = 0)
14. w ← Normalize-Weights(w)
15. {e,w} ← Remove-Experts({e,w},θ)
16. if (Λ 6= yi)
17. m ← m+1
18. em ← Create-New-Expert()
19. wm ← 1
20. end;
21. end;
22. for j ← 1,...,m
23. e j ← Train(e j
,~xi
, yi)
24. output Λ
end;
end.
Figure 1: Algorithm for dynamic weighted majority (DWM), after Kolter and Maloof (2005).
last expert in the ensemble. As mentioned previously, if the global prediction is incorrect (line 16),
DWM adds a new expert to the ensemble with a weight of one (lines 17–19). Finally, after using
the new example to train each learner in the ensemble (lines 22 and 23), DWM outputs the global
prediction, which is the weighted vote of the expert predictions (line 24).
As mentioned previously, the parameter p lets DWM better cope with many or noisy examples.
p defines the period over which DWM will not update learners’ weights (line 8) and will not remove
or create experts (line 13). During this period, however, DWM still trains the learners (lines 22 and
23).
DWM is a general algorithm for coping with concept drift. One can use any online learning
algorithm as the base learner. To date, we have evaluated two such algorithms, naive Bayes and
Incremental Tree Inducer, and we describe these versions in the next two sections.
3.1 DWM-NB
DWM-NB uses an incremental version of naive Bayes as the base learner. For this study, we used the
implementation from WEKA (Witten and Frank, 2005), which stores for nominal attributes a count
for each class and for each attribute value given the class. The count is simply the number of times
each class or attribute value appears in the training set, and so the learning element increments the
appropriate counts when processing a new example. The performance element uses these counts to
compute estimates of the prior probability of each class, P(Ci), and the conditional probability of
each attribute value given the class, P(v j
|Cj). It then operates under the assumption that attributes
are conditionally independent and uses Bayes’ rule to predict the most probable class:
C = argmax
Ci
P(Ci)∏
j
P(v j
|Ci) .
For numeric attributes, it stores the sum of an attribute’s values and the sum of the squared values.
Given a value, v j
,
P(v j
|Ci) =
1
σi j
√
2π
e
−(v j−µi j)
2/2σ
2
i j
,
where µi j
is the average of the jth attribute’s values for the ith class, and σi j
is their standard
deviation. The performance element computes these values from the stored sums.
3.2 DWM-ITI
DWM-ITI uses as a base learner an incremental algorithm for inducing decision trees, called Incremental Tree Inducer, or ITI (Utgoff et al., 1997). ITI uses as its concept description a decision tree
with only binary tests. (Note that we can represent multi-valued attributes with a binary tree by
treating each value as a binary attribute.) A decision tree is a rooted tree with internal nodes corresponding to attributes. Edges correspond to attribute values. For numeric attributes, there are two
edges corresponding to a cut-point: one edge for values above the cut-point, the other for values less
than or equal to the cut-point. The external nodes of the decision tree correspond to class labels.
To facilitate incremental learning, external nodes also store examples, while the internal nodes of
ITI’s decision trees store frequency counts for symbolic attributes and a list of observed values for
numeric attributes.
2765
KOLTER AND MALOOF
Like standard decision tree algorithms, given an observation, the performance element uses the
observation’s attributes and their values to traverse from the root node to an external node. It predicts
the class label stored in the node.
ITI updates a tree by propagating a new example to a leaf node. During the descent, the algorithm updates the information stored at each node—counts or values—and upon reaching a leaf
node, determines if the tree should be extended by converting the leaf node to a decision node. A
secondary process examines whether the tests at each node are most appropriate, and if not, restructures the tree accordingly.
As one can imagine, for large problems, storing all examples at leaf nodes and restructuring
decision trees can be costly, especially when maintaining an ensemble of such trees. While we
were judicious when applying DWM-ITI to large problems, as we see in the next section, where w